Learning Cooperative Primitives with Physical Human-Robot Interaction for a Human-Powered Lower Exoskeleton Rui Huang 1, Student Member , IEEE, Hong Cheng 1, Senior Member , IEEE, Hongliang Guo 2, Xichuan Lin 1, Qiming Chen 1, Fuchun Sun 3, Senior Member , IEEE Abstract— Human-powered lower exoskeletons have gained considerable interests from both academia and industry over the past few decades, and thus have seen increasing applica- tions in areas of human locomotion assistance and strength augmentation. One of the most important aspects in those applications is to achieve robust control of lower exoskeletons, which, in the ﬁrst place, requires the proactive modeling of human movement trajectories through physical Human-Robot Interaction (pHRI). As a powerful representation tool for motion trajectories, Dynamic Movement Primitive (DMP) has been used extensively to model human movement trajectories. However, canonical DMPs only offers a general ofﬂine represen- tation of human movement trajectory and neglects the real-time interaction term, therefore it cannot be directly applied to lower exoskeletons which need to model human motion trajectories online since different pilots have different trajectories and even one pilot might change his/her intended trajectory during walking. This paper presents a novel Coupled Cooperative Primitives (CCPs) scheme, which models the motion trajectories online. Besides maintaining canonical motion primitives, we also model the interaction term between the pilot and exoskeletons through impedance models and apply a reinforcement learning method based on Policy Improvement and Path Integrals (PI 2) to learn the parameters online. Experimental results on both a single Degree-Of-Freedom (DOF) platform and a HUman- powered Augmentation Lower EXoskeleton (HUALEX) system demonstrate the advantages of our proposed CCP scheme. Index Terms - Coupled Cooperative Primitive (CCP), Dy- namic Movement Primitive (DMP), Reinforcement Learning, Physical Human-Robot Interaction, HUman-powered Augmen- tation Lower EXoskeleton (HUALEX). I. INTRODUCTION Lower extremity exoskeletons are wearable robotic sys- tems which integrate human intelligence and robot power. They have progressed from the stuff of science ﬁction to nearly commercialized products over the last few decades. With the recent development of wearable technologies and wireless communication, lower extremity exoskeletons have gained considerable interests from researchers and seen in- creasing applications in human augmentation related scenar- ios [1][2]. As lower exoskeletons are tightly coupled with human beings, they (the exoskeletons) need to have the ability to follow the pilot’s motion with little interaction force. One prerequisite is that the lower exoskeleton needs to ‘know’ where the pilot intends to move. Thus, it is crucial 1Rui Huang, Hong Cheng, Xichuan Lin, Qiming Chen are with the School of Automation, Center for Robotics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China ruihuang2010@gmail.com 2Hongliang Guo is with School of Computer Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 3Fuchun Sun is with School of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China to model and predict human movement trajectories through physical Human-Robot Interaction (pHRI) [3]. Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMP) serves as a pow- erful tool for representing discrete and periodic trajectories, and has been widely used in imitation learning related ap- plications [5][6], especially in interaction tasks (both interact with human and the environment) [7][8][13]. In our previous work, we have proposed a Hierarchical Interactive Learning (HIL) framework [4], in which we use DMP to model the pilot’s motion trajectory. One drawback of that approach (as also mentioned in the paper’s future works) is that the pilot’s motion trajectory can only be updated after one full gait cycle. This means that when the pilot changes his/her gait pattern, he/she has to endure high interaction forces from lower exoskeletons during the same gait cycle. The interaction force will be reduced only after one full gait cycle. This is undesirable as the interaction force might be unbearable for human beings. We need to innovate an algorithm which adapts the pilot’s motion trajectory online. In this paper, we present a novel Coupled Cooperative Primitive (CCP) method to model and learn the motion trajectories online through pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. Compared with the DMPs used in HIL framework, the proposed CCP is able to adapt the predicted pilot’s motion trajectory online. This feature enables the lower exoskeleton’s application to scenarios where the pilot changes his/her motion patterns frequently. Different from fundamental DMPs, the proposed CCP adds an interac- tion model between the pilot and the exoskeleton as the modulation term. The modulation term, represented by the impedance model, can be used to describe the interaction change between pilot and the exoskeleton. When the pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton changes over time, we employ a reinforcement learning method based on Policy Improvement and Path Integrals (PI 2) to adapt/tune the parameters of modulation term in CCP online. The paper’s contribution can be summarized as follows: 1) A novel CCP is proposed, which learns the pilot’s mo- tion trajectories online through pHRI; the interaction force between pilot and the exoskeleton can be greatly reduced because of the CCP’s online adaptation; 2) We employ a reinforcement learning method based on PI 2 to adapt the modulation term online, which is model free (does not require pre-assumed human- movement models), and hence applicable directly to different pilots; 3) The proposed CCP scheme has been tested on both 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) Daejeon Convention Center October 9-14, 2016, Daejeon, Korea 978-1-5090-3762-9/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE 5355 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. single DOF platform and HULEX system. We ﬁrst validate the proposed CCP on a single degree- of-freedom (DOF) exoskeleton platform, and then test it on a human-powered augmentation lower exoskeleton (HUALEX) system. Experimental results show the online learning feature of the proposed CCP and its advantages over traditional ofﬂine DMP representation. The structure of this paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst introduce the proposed CCP in Section II, and then lay down the reinforcement learning algorithm for online learning of modulation term in Section III. Experimental results on both the single DOF platform and the HUALEX system are presented and analyzed in Section IV. This paper ends with conclusion and future work in Section V. II. C OUPLED COOPERATIVE PRIMITIVES This section presents the methodology details of the pro- posed coupled cooperative primitives. We will ﬁrst introduce the fundamental theory of DMP and its imitation learning process based on Locally Weighted Regression (LWR) in Section II-A. Then, in Section II-B, we introduce CCP, which adds an impedance model on top of basic DMPs to describe the pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. In human- coupled lower exoskeleton applications, the added modula- tion term is essential for the online adaptive representation of the pilot’s motion trajectories. A. Dynamic Movement Primitives DMP has been widely employed in robotic applications with a focus on imitation learning [6][7]. Many types of DMPs have been introduced in the literature [11]. In this paper, we employ a basic formulation provided in [5]. For a motion trajectory denoted by y, a DMP is deﬁned as the following set of nonlinear system equations: τ ˙z = αz(βz(g − y) − z) (1) τ ˙y = z + f (x) (2) where f (x) is a combination of nonlinear functions with Gaussian kernels: f (x) = ∑N i=1 ωiΨi(x) ∑N i=1 Ψi(x) x (3) Ψi(x) = exp(−hi(x − ci)2). (4) Here, N is the number of Gaussian kernels which have centers ci and widths hi. The parameters αz and βz in (1) are chosen as αz = 4βz, and τ determines duration of the DMP. The phase variable x in the nonlinear function (3) is utilized to avoid direct dependence of f on time. In this paper, we use the ﬁrst-order dynamics deﬁned as: τ ˙x = −αx · x, (5) where αx is a positive constant, and the initial condition is given by x(0) = 1. Shape is the most important feature of a motion trajectory, which is determined by a set of Gaussian kernel weights ωi in (3). The imitation learning process of DMP is to use the Locally Weighted Regression (LWR) method [12] to optimize the weights ωi through a given motion trajectory. B. Coupled Cooperative Primitives DMPs have already been used in robotic applications for interacting with the environment [9][13]. However, ex- oskeleton is a tightly-coupled robot, we need to use the pHRI between pilot and the exoskeleton to represent the modulation term. In this paper, we propose a new primitive which blends both original DMPs and the modulation term, and name it as Coupled Cooperative Primitives, because the new primitive brings the coupled relationship between pilot and the exoskeleton together in a cooperative way. We employ an impedance model to describe pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. The schematic diagram of pHRI in single Degree-Of-Freedom (DOF) exoskeleton system is shown in Fig. 1. Pilot Leg Exoskeleton Leg DC Motor Compliant Connections Knee Joint e Pilot Exoskeleton h Physical Human-Robot Interaction Fig. 1. The schematic diagram of pHRI in single DOF exoskeleton system. As shown in Fig. 1, the impedance model can be deﬁned as a spring-damper model which based on angle and angular error between the pilot and the exoskeleton: I = kp(θh − θe) +kd( ˙θh − ˙θe) (6) where kp and kd are stiffness and damper parameters, respec- tively. In the nonlinear system equations of original DMP (1) and (2), ˙ y denotes the velocity level of output y, and ˙ z denotes the acceleration level [9]. In this paper, the proposed CCP coupled the interaction model in both the velocity and acceleration levels: τ ˙z = αz(βz(g − y) − z) +cd ˙I (7) τ ˙y = z + f (x) +ckI (8) where ck and cd are scaling factors. In order to achieve the accurate representation of motion trajectories through pHRI between the pilot and the exoskele- ton, the scaling factors ck and cd must be tuned properly as well as parameters kp and kd in the impedance model. The next section will introduce a reinforcement learning method for online adaptation of those parameters. III. R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR PARAMETER ONLINE ADAPTATION In the previous work of modulation DMPs for a particular interaction task, Iteration Learning Control (ILC) method has been employed to learn the parameters of modulation parts 5356 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. ofﬂine, which is based on the collected sensor information [9]. However, in the application of human-powered lower exoskeletons, the pHRI is changing from pilot to pilot or even for one pilot over time. Hence, the parameters in CCP need to be learned online to ensure that the modulation of motion trajectories is suitable for the pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. PI2 algorithm is ﬁrst proposed to learn the parameters of DMPs via trial and error [14], and then applied in the learning-based impedance control strategy to obtain the impedance parameters of controllers for particular manipulat- ing tasks [15]. In this paper, we expand the PI 2 algorithm for the online learning of the CCP-related parameters, namely, ck, cd, kp and kd. Parameterized policies are employed in CCPs based on the PI 2 algorithm: at = GT t (Θ + εt ) (9) where Θ is a vector of the parameters [ck, cd, kp, kd]T and εt is interpreted as exploration noise. Gt represent the basis functions with Gaussian kernels w: [Gt ] j = w j ∑n i wi (10) The jth average weight of total n is calculated following (10), where n is the number of parameters that needs to be learned. The Gaussian kernels w are set to be the same formula as in (4). In the implementation of lower exoskeleton, the immediate reward function is calculated from the sensory feedback. For example, in single DOF exoskeleton, the immediate reward function is deﬁned as follows: rt = β1(θt − θ ∗ t )2 + β2( ˙θt − ˙θ ∗ t )2 (11) where θ and θ ∗ are the sensory feedbacks from the encoder and the inclinometer, which represent the angle of the exoskeleton θe and the pilot θh, respectively. The differentials represent the angular velocities. After deﬁning the actions and cost function, we implement the PI2 algorithm to update the parameters of CCP of single DOF exoskeleton online. The pseudocode of improved PI 2 algorithm for CCP of a single DOF exoskeleton is shown in Tab. I. As described in Tab. I, the parameters of CCPs will be updated every K gait cycles. The update rule is given in Tab. I with equations (12) to (16). Mti,k = H−1Gti,kGT ti,k GT ti,kH−1Gti,k (12) Si,k = N−1 ∑ j=i rt j,k + 1 2 N−1 ∑ j=i+1 (Θ + Mt j,kεt j,k)T H(Θ + Mt j,kεt j,k) (13) Pi,k = e− 1 λ Si,k ∑K k=1[e− 1 λ Si,k ] (14) ∆Θti = K ∑ k=1 [Pi,kMti,kεti,k] (15) TABLE I PSEUDOCODE OF IMPROVED PI2 ALGORITHM FOR UPDATING PARAMETERS OF CCP OF A SINGLE DOF EXOSKELETON . 1 Initialize the parameter vector Θ 2 Initialize the basis function Gti according (10) 3 Repeat 4 Run K gait cycles (roll-outs) of the exoskeleton using stochastic parameters Θ + εt at every time step 5 For all gait cycles k ∈ [1, K]: 6 Compute the projection matrix M through (12) 7 Compute the stochastic cost S through (13) 8 Compute the probability P through (14) 9 For all time steps i ∈ [1, ρ]: 10 Compute ∆Θti for each time step through (15) 11 Normalize ∆Θ according (16) 12 Update Θ ← Θ + ∆Θ 13 Run one noiseless gait cycle to compute the trajectory cost R through (17) 14 Until Trajectory cost R is converged [∆Θ] j = ∑ρ i=1(ρ − i)w j,ti[∆Θti] j ∑ρ i=1 w j,ti(ρ − i) (16) The matrix H in (12) is a positive semi-deﬁnite weight matrix, and the parameter λ in (14) is set automatically within (0,1]. After obtaining the updated parameters Θ in CPPs, the exoskeleton should take one noiseless gait cycle (Here, the term ‘noiseless’ means that we update parameters Θ without exploration noise εt) to compute the trajectory cost R, which determines whether the optimization process is terminated. The trajectory cost R is computed as follows: R = ρ ∑ i=1 rti (17) With the online adaptation of CCP parameters, the pHRI between the exoskeleton and the pilot can be reduced since the motion trajectories of the pilot has been predicted through CCPs. IV. E XPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSIONS In this section, we validate the proposed CCP scheme through experiments on both single DOF exoskeleton plat- form and the HUALEX system. Experimental setup, results and analysis are provided in following two subsections respectively. A. Numerical Simulation in Single DOF Exoskeleton 1) Single DOF Exoskeleton Platform: Fig. 1 illustrates the schematic diagram of the single DOF exoskeleton platform. In single DOF exoskeleton, the pilot’s leg is attached with the exoskeleton in the thigh and shank, which makes only the swing movement in the knee joint possible (i.e., single DOF). The exoskeleton is powered by a DC motor, which provides active torques on the exoskeleton system at the knee joint. An encoder is embedded in the knee joint to measure the angle information of the exoskeleton. The pilot is bounded on the exoskeleton via compliant connections at lower links. Due to the compliant connections, the pilot can make contact with exoskeleton ﬂexibly and impose forces to 5357 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. the exoskeleton. In order to measure the pilot’s motion, two inclinometers are installed on the compliant connections at the shank. 2) Experimental Setup: In order to compare the proposed CCP with the original DMP, the HIL framework [4] is employed in the experiment. HIL is a learning-based control framework which contains two learning hierarchies, namely, motion learning hierarchy and controller learning hierarchy. In the original HIL framework, DMP is utilized to model and learn the motion trajectories in the motion learning hierarchy. In the experiments of this paper, we employ the proposed CCP into the motion learning hierarchy in HIL framework (called CCP-HIL). Note that in this paper, we only focus on the results and discussions of the motion learning hierarchy. In the numerical simulation experiments on single DOF exoskeleton, the pilot’s motion is set as periodic sine waves but with different frequencies and amplitudes. Before controlling the exoskeleton via CCP, the weights of the Gaussians ( ωi in (3)) need to be trained through sampled pilot motion trajectories. Here we initialize the parameters of modulation parts in CCP (parameter vector Θ) as zero vector, and the number of Gaussians in CCP is set to be 25. The Locally Weighted Regression (LWR) method [12] is employed to learn the Gaussian weights incrementally. After obtaining the weights parameters in CCP, the ex- oskeleton will take several gait cycles to learn the optimal parameters Θ according to Tab. I, which makes the trajectory cost R converge. In the experiments, the exoskeleton runs for 4 ( K = 4) gait cycles to update the parameters and one gait cycle to calculate the trajectory cost R. Thus, the parameters Θ will be updated every 5 gait cycles. The time steps ρ is normalized to be 50 based on the time interval of each gait cycle. The weight parameters β1 and β2 are all chosen as 1000. 3) Experimental Results: In the numerical simulation of single DOF exoskeleton, two experiments are carried out to validate the proposed CCP in the HIL framework. The ﬁrst experiment is to evaluate the efﬁciency of the reinforcement learning algorithm in CCP. In this experiment, the exoskele- ton runs to follow the pilot’s motion for several gait cycles in order to make the trajectory cost R convergence. The learning curve of the proposed CCP in single DOF exoskeleton is shown in Fig. 2. 0 100 200 300 4000 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 Number of gait cycles Trajectory cost R Fig. 2. The learning curve of the proposed CCP in single DOF exoskeleton. As shown in Fig. 2, the trajectory R converges after the exoskeleton has been running for about 100 gait cycles (the parameters Θ are updated 20 times). Fig. 3 shows the updating process of parameters in CCP before the trajectory cost R converged (in total 100 gait cycles). 5 10 15 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 Parameters update times Parameters value kp kd ck cd Fig. 3. The updating process of parameters in CCP during the previous 100 gait cycles (20 times of updates). After the online learning of the parameters of the mod- ulation part in CCP, we compare the performance of CCP- HIL and the original HIL strategy with DMP. The pilot’s motion is set to a total of 11 gait cycles with different frequencies and amplitudes in this experiment. Fig. 4 shows the performances of the CCP-HIL and original HIL strategy with DMP in single DOF exoskeleton, where the interaction force between the pilot and the exoskeleton is calculated through (6) with the learned impedance parameters. In the original HIL strategy with DMP in Fig. 4 (a), the interaction force in the transition gait cycles increases signiﬁcantly when the pilot changes the gait cycle and the force will decease only after the full gait cycle. This is because DMPs need a whole gait cycle to imitate the motion trajectories. While Fig. 4 (b) shows that the proposed CCP can reduce the pHRI within the same transition gait cycle because the motion trajectories are corrected online through the modulation parts in CCP. Tab. II gives the comparison results of interaction force in the transition gait cycles (5 th gait cycle and 9 th gait cycle in our experiment). In the table, we can see the interaction forces of the proposed CCP are signiﬁcantly smaller than the original DMP (both in terms of the maximal force and mean force). TABLE II INTERACTION FORCE OF THE TRANSITION GAIT CYCLES IN SINGLE DOF SIMULATION . Interaction force (N) (DMP-HIL|CCP-HIL) Maximum Mean 5th gait cycle 3.04 0.84 2.54 0.36 9th gait cycle 4.63 0.76 3.18 0.25 B. Experiments on the HUALEX System 1) The HUALEX System: HUALEX system is designed as an ergonomic, robust and lightweight equipment for human augmentation applications. As shown in Fig. 5, HUALEX has total four active joints in hips and knees to provide driving torques, which are activated by DC servo motors. The ankle joints of HUALEX are designed as an energy- storage mechanism which stores energy in the stance phase 5358 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9−1.5 −1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 Time (s) Angle (rad) Pilots Joint Angle Exoskeletons Joint Angle Interaction Force −10 −7.5 −5 −2.5 0 2.5 5 7.5 10 Force (Newton) (a) original HIL strategy with DMP 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9−1.5 −1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 Time (s) Angle (rad) Pilots Joint Angle Exoskeletons Joint Angle Interaction Force −10 −7.5 −5 −2.5 0 2.5 5 7.5 10 Force (Newton) (b) combining CCP in HIL framework Fig. 4. Comparison of performances of (a) original HIL strategy and (b) combining CCP in HIL framework. and release it in the swing phase during walking. Besides the joints and rigid links, many semi-rigid connections at waist, thighs, shanks and feet are provided to connect HUALEX to the pilot, which aiming to make the connections compliantly. A distributed control system is embedded in HUALEX system, which consists of a main controller and four node controllers. The main controller is set at the backpack, which runs the perception and control algorithms. Near each active joint, a node controller is installed for two purposes: 1) collecting sensor data for the main controller; 2) executing commands from the main controller. In order to ensure the real-time performance of control algorithm, node controllers communicate with the main con- trollers via Controller Area Network (CAN). HUALEX has a total of three kinds of sensors for its current state monitoring. Encoders are integrated in joint actuators, which measures the current state of each joint. Moreover, inclinometers are installed on the compliant connections which aiming to measure the motion of the pilot. An accelerometer is set at the backpack to record the walking velocity of the pilot. Plantar sensors are placed in the sole for foot pressure measurement. 2) Experimental Setup: In the experiments of human- powered exoskeleton system, three pilots (A, B, C) with different heights (170cm, 176cm, 180cm) are chosen to operate the HUALEX system in sequence, which means that the learned parameters of CCPs with pilot A will be regarded as initial values of CCPs with pilot B. The HUALEX system is operated in different environment situations (ﬂat, slope and stair) with different walking speeds. The proposed CCP is running in each node controller independently, and the HIL framework is also embedded in the node controllers for achieving better control performance. The plantar sensors are utilized to obtain the start-end time point of each gait cycle,       Fig. 5. HUman-powered Augmentation Lower EXoskeleton (HUALEX) with the pilot. 1: The pilot; 2: The load backpack with the power unit and main controller (rigid connection with the HUALEX spline); 3: Semi-rigidly connecting HUALEX to the pilot (waist, thighs, shanks and feet); 4. Active joints with DC servo motors (hip joints and knee joints); 5. Node controllers for active joints; 6. Smart shoes with plantar sensors. and the accelerometer measures the walking speed of the pilot which relate to the frequency parameters in CCPs. Before operating the HUALEX system, the Gaussian weights in each CCP are trained through normal walk- ing motion trajectories from Clinical Gait Analysis (CGA) dataset. During the online reinforcement learning process of HUALEX system, the interaction models in CCPs will be inﬂuenced by the variation of compliant connections, such as locomotion caused by the pHRI. Therefore, the termination condition (also the start condition of reinforcement learning process after convergence) of each CCP in PI 2 algorithm (14 line in Tab. I) is changed to R < η (where η is a positive threshold). Other experimental settings are set as the same as in experiments of single DOF exoskeleton, and the threshold η is chosen as 10 for each CCP. 0 50 100 150 200 250 3000 50 100 150 200 250 Number of gait cycles Trajectory cost R pilot A pilot B pilot C (a) right knee joint 0 50 100 150 200 250 3000 50 100 150 200 250 Number of gait cycles Trajectory cost R pilot A pilot B pilot C (b) right hip joint Fig. 6. The learning curves of CCPs in the HUALEX system with different pilots at (a) right knee joint; (b) right hip joint. 3) Results and Discussions: Fig. 6 shows the learning curves of CCPs in HUALEX system with different pilots (the joints of right lower limb). As discussed in the experimental setup, pilot A operates the HUALEX system ﬁrst so that the online learning process of CCPs need to spend more gait cycles (almost 130 gait cycles as shown in Fig. 6). 5359 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. After obtaining the optimal parameters Θ from pilot A, the HUALEX system only need less than 50 gait cycles to convergence when the operator changes to pilot B and pilot C. Tab. III gives the optimal parameters in CCP of the right knee joint. TABLE III THE OPTIMAL PARAMETERS IN CCP S OF THE HUALEX SYSTEM IN RIGHT KNEE JOINT . Parameter values kp kd ck cd pilot A 1.16 1.89 3.04 2.24 pilot B 1.34 1.34 2.65 2.03 pilot C 1.45 1.62 2.62 2.58 After the online learning of the parameters in CCPs, the HUALEX system has a good performance in dealing with different walking patterns. Fig. 7 illustrates the control performance of the proposed CCP combining with the HIL strategy on pilot C after obtaining the optimal parameters in CCP. As shown in Fig. 7, the proposed algorithm can make the exoskeleton system follow the pilot’s motion with little tracking error in the transition cycles, which indicates that the pHRI between the pilot and the HUALEX system can be reduced signiﬁcantly in the transition gait cycles. The experimental results on both single DOF exoskeleton and HULEX show that, through online reinforcement learn- ing of parameters, the CCP is able to adapt with the changing pHRI between different pilots and the exoskeleton. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 −1.2 −1 −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 Time (s) Angle (rad) Pilot’s Joint Angle Exoskeleton’s Joint Angle Fig. 7. Control performance of CCP combining with the HIL strategy on HUALEX system with pilot C in a total of 11 second walking (period of whole experiment) at right knee joint. V. C ONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK This paper has proposed a Coupled Cooperative Prim- itive (CCP) for the robust control of a HUman-powered Augmentation Lower EXoskeleton robotic system. The CCP can model and learn the pilot’s motion trajectories online through the pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. Reinforcement learning method based on PI 2 algorithm is employed to update the parameters of modulation terms in CCP, which adapts with the changing pHRI online. The performance of the CCP has been evaluated on a single DOF exoskeleton platform as well as the HUALEX robotic system. Experimental results show that the proposed CCP is able to model and learn the pilot’s motion trajectories online through pHRI between the pilot and the exoskeleton. In the future, we will build a hybrid agent framework to model the human-coupled exoskeleton, which has both inner interactions (interaction between the pilot and the exoskeleton) and external interactions (interaction with the environment). In this framework, the motion models and con- trollers need to consider both interactions with the pilot and the environment. Moreover, understanding the environment with extra sensors is also a critical issue for robust control in complex environments. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was made possible by support from NSFC (No. 61503060, 6157021026), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (ZYGX2014Z009) and SRF for ROCS, SEM. REFERENCES [1] H. Kazerooni, A. Chu, R. Steger, “That Which Does Not Stabilize, Will Only Make Us Stronger”, International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 26, 2007, pp 75-89. [2] C. J. Walsh, D. Paluska, et al., “Development of a Lightweight, Under- actuated Exoskeleton for Load-Carrying Augmentation”, In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2006, pp 3485-3491. [3] H.T. Tran, H. Cheng, X. Lin, R. Huang, “The Relationship between Physical Human-Exoskeleton Interaction and Dynamic Factors: Us- ing a Learning Approach for Control Applications”, Science China Information Science , vol. 57, no. 12, 2014. [4] R. Huang, H. Cheng, H. Guo, et al., “Hierarchical Interactive Learning for a Human-Powered Augmentation Lower Exoskeleton”, In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2016 (accepted) [5] A.J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, S. Schaal, “Movement Imitation with Nonlinear Dynamical Systems in Humanoid Robots”, In IEEE Inter- national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2002, pp 1398-1430. [6] A.J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, S. Schaal, “Learning Rhythmic Movements by Demonstration using Nonlinear Oscillators”, In IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2002, pp 958- 963. [7] J. Nakanishi, J. Morimoto, G. Endo, et al., “Learning from Demonstra- tion and Adaptation of Biped Locomotion”, Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 47, no. 2, 2004. [8] H.B. Amor, G. Neumann, S. Kamthe, et al., “Interation Primitives for Human-Robot Cooperation Tasks”, In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2014, pp 2831-2837. [9] A. Gams, B. Nemec, A.J. Ijspeert, “Coulpling Movement Primitives: Interaction with the Environment and Bimanual Tasks”, IEEE Trans- action on Robotics , vol. 30, no. 4, 2014. [10] R. Huang, H. Cheng, Q. Chen, et al., “Interative Learning for Sensitiv- ity Factors of a Human-Powered Augmentation Lower Exoskeleton”, In IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2015, pp 6409-6415. [11] S. Schaal, J. Peters, J. Nakanishi, A.J. Ijspeert, “Learning Rhythmic Movements by Demonstration using Nonlinear Oscillators”, In IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2003, pp 1-21. [12] S. Schaal, C.G. Atkeson, “Constructive Incremental Learning from Only Local Information”, Neural Computation , vol. 10, no. 8, 1998. [13] H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, D.H. Park, et al., “Biologically-Inspired Dynamical Systems for Movement Generation: Automatic Real-Time Goal Adaptation and Obstacle Avoidance”, In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2009, pp 2587-2592. [14] E.A. Theodorou, J. Buchli, S. Schaal, “A Generalized Path Integral Control Aproach to Reinforcement Learning”, Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 11, 2010. [15] J. Buchli, F. Stulp, E.A. Theodorou, S. Schaal, “Learning Variable Impedance Control”, International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 30, no. 7, 2011. 5360 Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.