Improving CMA-ES convergence speed, efficiency, and reliability in noisy robot optimization problems Russell M. Martinrumartin@stanford.edu Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, 94305, USA Steven H. Collinsstevecollins@stanford.edu Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, 94305, USA Abstract Experimental robot optimization often requires evaluating each candidate policy for seconds to minutes. The chosen evaluation time influences optimization because of a speed-accuracy tradeoff: shorter evaluations enable faster iteration, but are also more subject to noise. Here, we introduce a supplement to the CMA-ES optimization algo- rithm, named Adaptive Sampling CMA-ES (AS-CMA), which assigns sampling time to candidates based on predicted sorting difficulty, aiming to achieve consistent preci- sion. We compared AS-CMA to CMA-ES and Bayesian optimization using a range of static sampling times in four simulated cost landscapes. AS-CMA converged on 98% of all runs without adjustment to its tunable parameter, and converged 24-65% faster and with 29-76% lower total cost than each landscape’s best CMA-ES static sampling time. As compared to Bayesian optimization, AS-CMA converged more efficiently and reli- ably in complex landscapes, while in simpler landscapes, AS-CMA was less efficient but equally reliable. We deployed AS-CMA in an exoskeleton optimization experiment and found the optimizer’s behavior was consistent with expectations. These results in- dicate that AS-CMA can improve optimization efficiency in the presence of noise while minimally affecting optimization setup complexity and tuning requirements. Keywords Covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES), exoskeleton optimization, noisy optimization, evolution strategies, efficient optimization 1 Introduction For robotic systems that operate in complex and variable contexts, such as autonomous vehicles, dexterous manipulators, and collaborative robots, exclusively optimizing de- sign parameters and control strategies in simulated environments can be insufficient because these simulations often do not fully capture the intricacies of the real world (Kang et al., 2019; Zhu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019; Luo et al., 2024; Peng et al., 2025). Alternatively, experimental optimization can be conducted directly with the physical robotic systems in their real environments. This confers the advantage of removing the need for the experimenter to parameterize details about the simulated environment, which can save time and, by testing in the real world instead of using a model, can lead to higher-quality optimization results. Experimental optimization techniques are also advantageous because they can enable continuous online improvement when in- tegrated into a robot that has already been deployed (Zhu et al., 2020; Slade et al., 2022). ©202X by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Evolutionary Computation x(x): xxx-xxx This is the authors’ final accepted manuscript (post-peer-review, pre-publication). It has been accepted for publication inEvolutionary Computationon January 12, 2026. arXiv:2601.09594v1 [cs.NE] 14 Jan 2026 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins One example domain of where real-world robot optimization has been advanta- geous is in optimization of exoskeletons that assist walking. Here, simulated optimiza- tion is inadequate because the human-robot interaction is difficult to model accurately: human response to robotic assistance is very difficult to predict (Handford and Srini- vasan, 2018), people can respond differently to the same assistance (Grimmer et al., 2019), and users’ proficiency varies with time (Poggensee and Collins, 2021). Strategies for experimentally optimizing exoskeleton assistance range from hand-tuning, which delivers moderate benefits (Ding et al., 2016; Malcolm et al., 2013), to the deployment of algorithmic strategies known as human-in-the-loop optimization, which have pro- duced significantly greater benefits in recent years (Ding et al., 2016; Slade et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2017). Human-in-the-loop optimization typically involves the selection of exoskeleton timing and torque parameters while using human biomechanical mea- surements such as energy cost, muscle activity, or kinematics as the objective function. Although human-in-the-loop optimization has primarily been deployed in biomecha- tronic research, it is expected to have similar applicability to the optimization of indus- trial, medical, and transportation-related human-robot systems (Slade et al., 2024). A challenge when conducting experimental optimization is the presence of noise in the signal(s) of interest, which makes optimization time-consuming and less precise (Arnold and Beyer, 2006, 2001). A simple yet useful model of noise is as follows: for a given candidatex i, the influence of noiseϵon measured costf meas(xi)relative to the true costf true(xi)isf meas(xi) =f true(xi) +ϵ, whereϵ∼ N(0, σ). The effect of noise can be reduced by sampling every condition many times and taking the mean or median, or by running the optimization many times. However, these strategies can be prohibitively time consuming in experimental optimization, where each measure- ment can take minutes and optimization runs need to converge on the first attempt. Instead, a realistic sampling time must be allocated to each candidate before or during optimization. This problem has been recognized and explored in simulated optimiza- tion, where methods like Optimal Computing Budget Allocation aim to allocate sam- ples to alternatives with the highest expected value of information (Xiao and Lee, 2014; Bartz-Beielstein et al., 2007). When allocating sample time, each condition can be time- consuming and accurate, or fast and inaccurate; over an optimization run the former strategy takes longer to converge but arrives at a better optimum, while the latter con- verges faster but with poorer optimum quality (Aizawa and Wah, 1994). In real-world experimental optimization, the balance between speed and accuracy is often made sim- ply by choosing a single, moderate sample time and assessing every condition with the same precision (Ding et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2017). In this paper, when referring to the amount of sampling budget allocated to a candidate, we use the phrase “sample time,” which could mean either a continuous amount of time or a discrete amount of samples taken of the same candidate. For the example case of exoskeleton optimization, sample time refers to the amount of minutes that a single assistance condition would be tested for as the participant approaches steady state. Sample time could also be referred to as a discrete number of samples (e.g. a 30 second condition could also be measured as 10 breath samples at 3 seconds per breath); we use sample time in this paper to align with common practice in biomechanics research, where treadmill walking trials are defined by time. Covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES) (Hansen et al., 2003) is a stochastic evolutionary algorithm that seeks to minimize the black-box objective functionf:x∈R n →R. CMA-ES operates by sampling a generation of candidates based on a covariance matrix, evaluating each candidate’s fitness (i.e. cost), selecting 2Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise the top performers, updating the covariance matrix accordingly, and then repeating the process. CMA-ES is well suited for experimental robot optimization because it does not require derivative information, and is robust in cost functions with noise, noncon- vexity, parameter interaction, and multi-modality (Hansen, 2016; Groves and Branke, 2018; Kochenderfer, 2019). CMA-ES has applications in experimental robot optimiza- tion, notably in exoskeleton assistance optimization. The use of CMA-ES in human- in-the-loop optimization of ankle exoskeleton assistance improved the field’s largest reduction of energy cost of walking from 14% to 24% (Zhang et al., 2017); subsequent exoskeleton studies using CMA-ES have demonstrated the algorithm’s efficacy in high- dimensional spaces (Franks et al., 2021), in multi-objective optimization (Lakmazaheri et al., 2024), and outside the laboratory (Slade et al., 2022). Examples of experimen- tal CMA-ES beyond exoskeleton optimization include optimization of robotic grasping (Hu et al., 2019), robot movement control and path planning (Hill et al., 2020; Shafii et al., 2015; Sharifzadeh et al., 2021), combustion feedback control (Hansen et al., 2008), and obstacle detection (Bergener et al., 2001). An alternative to CMA-ES is Bayesian optimization, which is a sample-efficient op- timization method for expensive or noisy black-box functions. It builds a probabilistic surrogate model of the cost landscape using kriging, continuously refines its predic- tions and uncertainty estimates as new samples are made. These samples are chosen using an acquisition function, which balances exploration of uncertain regions with exploitation of areas likely to yield better performance (Forrester et al., 2008; Kochen- derfer, 2019). Bayesian optimization has also demonstrated success in human-in-the- loop exoskeleton optimization (Ding et al., 2018), and is believed to have an advantage over CMA-ES in lower-dimensionality search spaces with approximately 20 or fewer parameters (Kutulakos and Slade, 2024). However, the effects of sampling noise, local minima frequency, and parameter interactions on the relative performance of these two optimization algorithms are unclear. Special variants of evolutionary algorithms have been proposed for use in envi- ronments with high noise (Rakshit et al., 2017): Explicitandimplicit averaging(Di Pietro et al., 2004; Arnold and Beyer, 2003) use re- sampling to achieve a predetermined threshold of precision. While explicit averaging samples the same candidate multiple times and implicit averaging samples more candi- dates per generation, both seek to reduce the amplitude of noise affecting the optimizer. However, this approach can lead to redundant sampling, which is time-consuming and can reduce efficiency. Model fitting(Branke et al., 2001) andspatial averaging(Sano and Kita, 2002) both seek to smooth the cost landscape over the parameter space using prior measurements. These methods work by using previously sampled points to create a local model or to create pseudo-samples to inform the cost of the candidate of interest. While these strategies are beneficial because they enable the leveraging of prior knowledge, they may perform poorly in sparsely sampled regions of the cost landscape. Parameter adaptingvariants of CMA-ES (Nomura and Shibata, 2024; Nishida and Akimoto, 2018) have recently been proposed; these algorithms modify the learning rate or population size based on an estimate of the confidence in the update of the CMA-ES distribution parameters. While these techniques demonstrate promising utility, they do not address the challenge of determining how much sampling should be allocated to each candidate. Lastly,dynamic resampling techniques(Groves and Branke, 2018; Heidrich-Meisner and Igel, 2009; Hansen et al., 2008; Schmidt et al., 2006) create an online estimate of Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x3 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins confidence in the current candidates’ fitness rank order by sampling all candidates in a generation, then allocating more samples to selected candidates. A strength of such approaches is that the amount of sampling per candidate can be adjusted based on previously-measured fitness values for the candidates of that generation. While this within-generation sampling allocation is beneficial, these approaches do not specify a method for adapting the per-generation sampling budget, instead opting to fix this value before optimization begins. However, this may be limiting in scenarios where it could be advantageous to sample one generation more than another, for example, if that generation is in a more shallow part of the cost landscape where candidates will have more similar costs. Additionally, sampling candidates multiple times to discern the amount of additional samples (if any) that are required may lead to unnecessary sampling. Lastly, these sampling strategies may result in “doubling back,” where can- didates that have been previously evaluated are evaluated again. This could be unde- sirable in situations where switching between candidates should be minimized. For example, in dexterous robotic manipulation tasks, evaluating a new control strategy may require physical reconfiguration of the workspace, reinitialization of sensor base- lines, or regrasping of objects—each of which incurs substantial overhead (Luo et al., 2024). This makes frequent switching between candidates inefficient and disruptive to experimental throughput. In exoskeleton assistance optimization, it takes minutes for a human’s cardiorespiratory system to reach steady-state every time exoskeleton assis- tance changes (Selinger and Donelan, 2014). This means that each additional change in assistance requires additional experiment time, as the participant needs time to come to steady state again. While algorithms that aim to more efficiently allocate samples to a generation of candidates by avoiding doubling back have been developed for parti- cle swarm optimization (Bartz-Beielstein et al., 2007) and simulated annealing (Schutte et al., 2024), work towards such aims with CMA-ES is limited. Building on these approaches, our research goal was to develop a modification to CMA-ES, called Adaptive Sampling CMA-ES (AS-CMA), to make experimental opti- mization in the presence of noise faster, more efficient, and more reliable. AS-CMA includes the following key features in support of these goals: First, AS-CMA enables the use of basic prior knowledge about the sampling method and cost landscape that could be acquired without doing an optimization run. This includes knowledge of how the number of samples of a candidate affects that candidate’s noise level. Second, AS-CMA does not re-measure candidates that have already been measured. Third, AS- CMA does not rely on candidates that were sampled in much earlier iterations, which maintains the advantage of CMA-ES being mostly agnostic to samples before the cur- rent generation. This property is valuable when optimizing in time-varying contexts, such as human-robot systems, where the human’s cost landscape may evolve as they progress from novice to expert (Poggensee and Collins, 2021). Finally, AS-CMA allows sampling time to vary across generations, enabling greater precision when it is needed, and faster iteration when it is not. The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we describe CMA-ES, our proposed AS-CMA method, and an alternative approach using Bayesian optimization, then define our simulated optimization framework and outcome metrics. Section 2 concludes by detailing a laboratory experiment where AS-CMA is used to optimize ankle exoskeleton assistance with the objective of minimizing the energy cost of walking. In Section 3, we assess how adaptive sampling affects the sorting stage of CMA-ES, and evaluate the simulated optimization outcomes from CMA-ES, AS- CMA, and Bayesian optimization by comparing the algorithms’ convergence speed, 4Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise efficiency, and reliability. We also give results from the laboratory exoskeleton exper- iment by showing the movement of selected parameters and resultant costs over the course of the experiment. Section 4 contextualizes our results by summarizing the ben- efits and potential limitations of adaptive sampling, as well as considering the potential implications of these findings on future real-world optimization applications. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper by summarizing our findings, suggesting future work, and sharing a link to our open-source code repository. 2 Methods 2.1 CMA-ES CMA-ES (Hansen, 2016) is a black-box evolutionary optimization algorithm that oper- ates by iteratively selecting candidate points from a multivariate normal distribution, evaluating them, and then updating that distribution based on the best-performing candidates. Here, we separate the algorithm into four steps. Candidate creation step.First,λcandidates are sampled fromN(m, σ 2C), where meanm∈R n defines the center of the distribution, covariance matrixC∈R n×n defines the shape of the distribution, and step sizeσsets the spread of the distribution from which candidates are drawn. Each candidatex i is found in generationgas: xi ∼m g +σ gN(0,C g)fori= 1, . . . , λ(1) λis typically set to4 +⌊3 ln(n)⌋, wherenis the dimensionality of the optimization problem (Hansen, 2016). Evaluation step.Each candidatex i is evaluated, which determines the fitnessy i of that candidate. An evaluation may involve a single sample or multiple samples that are synthesized into a single value by averaging or fitting a model. Selection step.After determiningy i for every candidate, candidates are sorted based on fitness, producing a sorted arrayx i:λ, where the subscripti:λcorresponds to thei-th best candidate. Update step.The multivariate normal distribution state variablesm,σ, andC are updated based onx i:λ.mis updated from∆mfrom a weighted sum of the topµ candidates: ∆m= µX i=1 wi(xi:λ −m g)(2) mg+1 =m g + ∆m(3) whereµis often set to⌊λ/2⌋and weightsw 1 ≥w 2 ≥ · · · ≥w µ ≥0sum to 1 (Hansen, 2016). This update shifts the mean towards high-performing candidates from the most recent generation. Updating step sizeσinvolves first updating the conjugate evolution pathp σ as pσ,g+1 = (1−c σ)pσ,g + q cσ(2−c σ)µef f(Cg)− 1 2 mg+1 −m g σg (4) wherec −1 σ ≈n/3andµ ef f = (Pµ i=1 w2 i )−1. Then the step sizeσis updated as σg+1 =σ g exp  cσ dσ  ∥pσ,g+1∥ E∥N(0,I)∥ −1  (5) Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x5 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins true cost measured cost, static samples measured cost, adaptive samples parameter value excessive precision desired precision inadequate precision tlong tlong tshort long sample times because δ23 is small short sample time because δ 13 is large δ13 δ23 x1 x2 x3 1 2 3 tmed tmed tmed Figure 1: Overview of sample allocation problem posed by noisy optimization and the proposed solution in adaptive sampling. If all candidates are measured for a medium amount of time (probability distribution for these measurements shown in green), ex- cessive or inadequate sorting precision may result. If measurement time instead were based on the difference between the candidate and its nearest-costing neighborδ, an appropriate amount of sample time (probability distribution for these measurements shown in blue) could be allocated. whered σ ≈1is the damping parameter. This update, known as cumulative step length adaptation, increasesσif∆mpoints in a similar direction in multiple consecutive up- dates, and decreasesσif∆mis anti-correlated in consecutive updates. Updating the covariance matrix begins with calculation of the evolution pathpc as pc,g+1 = (1−c c)pc,g +h σ q cc(2−c c)µef f mg+1 −m g σg (6) wherec −1 c ≈n/4andh σ is 1 if||p σ||≲1.5 √n, or otherwise 0. Then,Cis updated as Cg+1 = (1 +c 1∆(hσ)−c 1 −c µ)Cg +c 1pcp⊺ c +c µ µX i=1 wi xi:λ −m g σg  xi:λ −m g σg ⊺ (7) wherec 1 ≈2/n 2,c µ ≈µ ef f/n2, and∆(h σ) = (1−h σ)cc(2−c c)≤1. In essence, the covariance matrix update results in the covariance matrix elongating in the approxi- mate direction of the landscape’s gradient and contracting in directions orthogonal to the gradient. 2.2 Adaptive Sampling Overview AS-CMA is a systematic method for allocating sample timet i to candidatesi= 1. . . λ chosen in the candidate creation step. The way sample time is allocated affects opti- mization efficiency: more samples of a candidate improves its cost estimation accuracy, but excessive sampling may waste time that would be better spent evaluating new can- didates. If insufficient time is spent sampling the candidate, then its fitness is likely to be over- or under-estimated, which may adversely affect optimization (Figure 1). AS-CMA leverages the fact that the selection stage of CMA-ES uses the rank or- dering of candidates, not the actual measured values, meaning the amount of noise a candidate can tolerate is related to how distinct its fitness is. If a candidate’si’s cost difference to its most similar cost neighbor,δ (i) nearest, is large, that candidate can tolerate 6Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise more noise and thus needs fewer samples. Conversely, if two candidates in a gen- eration have similar fitness, they will need to be evaluated with a greater number of samples to ensure proper sorting accuracy in the selection step (Figure 1). By allocat- ing sample time based onδ (i) nearest, AS-CMA seeks to achieve consistent signal-to-noise ratio, where signal isδ (i) nearest and noise is related to sample time. In practice,δ (i) nearest is not known before candidates are evaluated, so a proxy, ˆδ(i) nearest, is needed. AS-CMA estimates ˆδ(i) nearest using the distanced (i) nearest between candidateiand its nearest neighbor (Figure 2), reasoning that candidates that are closer together will be more difficult to sort. This distance is scaled by an estimate of the local slope,k avg, to get ˆδ(i) nearest. This scaling accounts for the fact that closely grouped candidates on a steep region of the landscape will be easier to sort than if they were in a shallow region. Knowing ˆδ(i) nearest, we next determine how much noise that candidate can tolerate. We denote this noiseϵ i =E(t i), whereϵ i is the magnitude of the standard deviation of the error distribution (with a mean centered at 0) when sampling the candidate for timet i with noise modelE(t). We model noise as being a percentage of the true cost, i.e. percent error, for consistency across different cost landscapes. The noise when measuring candidateiaffects the measured cost difference between the candidate and its nearest neighbor. The noise in this inter-candidate difference is denotedσ (i) nearest and is proportional toϵ i. Together, ˆδ(i) nearest andσ (i) nearest parameterize the “estimated detected difference” distribution, with a mean ˆδ(i) nearest and standard deviationσ (i) nearest. In this distribution, the area above zero is equal to the likelihood of correctly sorting candidate iand its nearest neighbor. Finally, we can chooset i to ensure that the signal-to-noise ratio,β= ˆδ(i) nearest/σ(i) nearest, is large enough to achieve precise sorting, while also small enough to prevent wasted samples. We expected that AS-CMA would generally increase sampling time over an opti- mization run because, as the optimizer approached a point of minima, neighbor dis- tanced (i) nearest and steepnessk avg would decrease. We hypothesized that this effect would improve optimization by allowing for rapid evaluation of diverse candidates early in optimization and precise evaluation of more promising and similar candidates selected later in optimization. Furthermore, sample time selection can also change to match the landscape’s local characteristics without requiring any metaparameter ad- justments. For example, if the optimizer moved from a shallow to a steep region of the cost landscape,d (i) nearest andk avg would increase, decreasing sample time so that the optimizer can quickly move down the gradient. 2.3 Adaptive Sampling Implementation Inputs and Initialization.Following CMA-ES initialization, AS-CMA requires initial- ization of three additional state variables,d max,k avg, andy avg, which are used for sample time calculations in every generation and updated as new measurements are made. These variables are initialized for the first CMA-ES generation using four val- ues: the maximum and minimum allowable candidate values in the search spacex max andx min (which are already defined in CMA-ES initialization), and user-input esti- mates of the maximum and minimum costs that could be measured in the search space ˆymax andˆymin. A high level of accuracy in estimatingˆy max andˆymin is not necessary for the success of AS-CMA, as the updates done to the state variables after the first generation will use measured values instead ofˆymax andˆymin, which will allow for the algorithm to adapt to the shape of the local region of search. Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x7 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins desired precision Generation of candidates [x1, ..., xλ] Sample times [t 1, ..., tλ]di,n Nearest neighbor distance as a proxy for cost diﬀerence di,n parameter value true cost target noise noise δi,n ? xi xn ? ? (t) Estimate target noise level that achieves desired precisionneighbor diﬀerence Select sample time using target noise levelsample time εi di,n εi εi = f(di,n, kavg, yavg, β) nearest neighbor candidate i εi ti AS-CMA for i in {1, ..., λ}, do: Local landscape model [kavg yavg], precision β Sample time-noise model (t) Figure 2: Summary of how AS-CMA determines sample time. For each candidatei, the estimated cost difference to its nearest neighborδ (i) nearest is unknown prior to sam- pling, so AS-CMA uses the nearest neighboring parameter’s distanced (i) nearest instead (Algorithm 1, line 9). Usingd (i) nearest, the target noise levelϵ i is found by using an ap- proximation of the local cost landscape (k avg andy avg) such that the sorting precision of the candidate and its nearest neighbor should achieve the desired precisionβ. (Al- gorithm 1, line 10). Usingϵ i, sample timet i can be found by inverting noise modelE(t) (Algorithm 1, line 11). The maximum possible candidate separation,d max, is held constant throughout optimization, and is found as the 2-norm distance betweenx max andx min: dmax =∥x max −x min∥2 (8) The average cost of the local region of search,yavg, is initialized by averagingˆymax andˆymin as yavg = ˆymax + ˆymin 2 (9) The distance-difference relationship of the local region of search,k avg, will be used to give an approximation of how different two candidates’ costs are given their distance apart.k avg is initialized before the first generation usingˆymax andˆymin, assuming that the distance between the largest and smallest possible values in the cost landscape is separated by half of the maximum possible distance: kavg = ˆymax −ˆymin 0.5·d max (10) In addition toˆymax andˆymin, two more inputs are required before AS-CMA can begin. These areβ, which is the desired signal-to-noise ratio when sorting candidates, andE(t), which is the function mapping sample time to the magnitude of the standard deviation of the expected error distribution with sample timet. The use ofβ= 1.3 is recommended, as it gives empirically strong performance across a range of differ- ent cost landscapes with varying dimensionality. Ifβwere increased, AS-CMA would favor longer sample times, which would allow for a higher-quality solution by the conclusion of optimization at the cost of taking more time to converge. The opposite outcome would occur ifβwere made smaller.E(t)could be a continuous function, such as a decreasing exponential function or a piecewise function interpolated from experimental data. 8Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise Assignment of sample time.The primary function of AS-CMA is to select an appropriate amount of sampling time for each candidate in a generation. This occurs after the candidate creation step and before the evaluation step. Afterλcandidates are chosen as in Eq. 1, the normalized distance from candidateito its nearest neighbor d(i) nearestis calculated as d(i) nearest = min 1≤j≤λ,j̸=i [∥xi −x j∥2] dmax  (11) Knowingd (i) nearest, the estimated cost difference between candidateiand its nearest neighbor, ˆδ(i) nearest, is found as ˆδ(i) nearest =k avg ·d (i) nearest (12) Using this estimate of ˆδ(i) nearest, the amount of acceptable noise can be calculated to achieve the desired signal-to-noise ratio. To estimate the magnitude of measurement noise, we temporarily assume that candidateiand its nearest neighbor’s costs are equal to the average cost of the local region of searchy avg, and that these two measurements are subject to the same amount of noise,ϵ i (in units of percent). Then, the standard deviation of the measured costs for the candidate and its nearest neighbor,σ i andσ n, are calculated as σi =σ n =y avg ·ϵ i (13) σi andσ n are directly related to the standard deviation of the measured difference between candidatesσ (i) nearest as (Branke and Schmidt, 2003): σ(i) nearest = q σ2 i +σ 2n (14) Combining equations 13 and 14 gives the standard deviation of the measured dif- ference between the candidatesσ (i) nearest as a function of each candidate’s measurement noise: σ(i) nearest = √ 2·y avg ·ϵ i (15) In essence,σ (i) nearest is the noise involved in the sorting task between the candidate and its nearest neighbor. For a candidate with a larger estimated cost difference be- tween itself and its nearest neighbor,ˆδ(i) nearest, a larger value ofσ (i) nearest is acceptable. Con- versely, a candidate with a very similar cost to its neighbor, i.e. a small ˆδ(i) nearest, will require greater precision in its measurement, meaning a smallerσ (i) nearest is needed. The desired signal-to-noise ratio metaparameter is found asβ= ˆδ(i) nearest/σ(i) nearest. Substituting forσ (i) nearest using equation 15 and forˆδ(i) nearest using equation 12, then solving forϵ i gives: ϵi = kavg ·d (i) nearest√ 2·β·y avg (16) Equation 16 summarizes the decision made by AS-CMA. That is, by using knowl- edge of the local cost landscape (k avg andy avg), AS-CMA identifies the maximum amount of noiseϵ i that can be tolerated while still allowing correct sorting of a neighbor of distanced (i) nearest with precision parameterized byβ. Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x9 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins Algorithm 1Adaptive Sampling CMA-ES 1:input AS-CMA Parameters:ˆy max,ˆymin,β,E(t) 2:initialize:d max,y avg kavg per eq. 8-10 3: whilenot terminateddo 4: ▷CMA-ES: Candidate creation◁ 5: foriin{1, . . . , λ}do 6: xi ∼m g +σ gN(0,C g) 7: ▷AS-CMA: Determine sample time◁ 8: foriin{1, . . . , λ}do 9: d(i) nearest = min1≤j≤λ,j̸=i  [∥xi−xj ∥2] dmax  10: ϵi ← kavg ·d(i) nearest√ 2·β·yavg 11: ti ←arg min t |E(t)−ϵ i| 12: ▷CMA-ES: Evaluation, selection, update◁ 13: foriin{1, . . . , λ}do 14: yi ←f meas(xi, ti) 15: xi:λ ←sort(x,y) 16: Updatem,σ,Cper eq. 2-7 17: ▷AS-CMA: Update◁ 18: yavg ← 1 λ Pλ i=1 yi 19: dy = [(yi −y j)]1≤i,j≤λ 20: dx = [∥xi −x j∥2]1≤i,j≤λ 21: kavg = arg min k ∥dy −kd x∥2 2 After findingϵ i, the sample timet i can be found by inverting the model mapping measurement time to measurement noiseE(t) =ϵ. This sample time calculation pro- cess is repeated for all candidatesi= 1, . . . , λin the generation. Then, candidatesx 1:λ are evaluated for timet 1:λ to identify costsy 1:λ. Then the CMA-ES selection and update steps occur. Update of local cost landscape estimation.After the CMA-ES update step, AS- CMA state variablesy avg andk avg are updated to inform cost difference estimation in the next generation. Updatingy avg is trivial: yavg = 1 λ λX i=1 yi (17) Updatingk avg requires fitting a distance-difference linear model to data from the cur- rent generation. First, vectors made up of the pairwise candidate cost differences dy = [(yi −y j)]1≤i,j≤λ and parameter distancesd x = [∥xi −x j∥2]1≤i,j≤λ are calculated. Then, the cost difference-parameter distance relationship between each candidate and each of its neighbors is fit using least squares as kavg = arg min k ∥dy −kd x∥2 2 (18) Aftery avg andk avg have been updated, the next generation can begin with the candi- date creation step. 10Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise AS-CMA maintains the same order of computational complexity as CMA-ES. The main additional cost arises from calculating pairwise candidate distances within each generation, which scales asO(λ 2). Updates tok avg andy avg involve simple vector op- erations and a least-squares fit, which scale linearly withλand the problem dimension n. A summary of AS-CMA in the context of CMA-ES is given in Algorithm 1. 2.4 Evaluation in Simulation We compared CMA-ES with various static sample times to AS-CMA in four cost land- scapes with features that are relevant to a range of optimization problems. The number and types of landscapes and the variety of noise levels were chosen to align with simi- lar studies of evolutionary algorithms for noisy optimization (Groves and Branke, 2018; Kutulakos and Slade, 2024; Hansen et al., 2008). The tested landscapes were: 1. A 4-dimensional empirical approximation of the metabolic cost landscape of an- kle exoskeleton assistance (Zhang et al., 2017), chosen to allow qualitative com- parisons to be made between simulated and experimental data. We refer to this landscape as Ankle. 2. 4-dimensional generalized Rosenbrock function (Rosenbrock, 1960), chosen to as- sess performance in scenarios with interaction between variables. 3. 4-dimensional Levy function (Laguna and Marti, 2005), chosen to evaluate the ef- fect of many local minima. 4. 20-dimensional Sphere function (Dixon, 1978), chosen to test how algorithmic per- formance scales with problem dimension (e.g. a 22-dimensional exoskeleton opti- mization problem given in Franks et al. (2021)). Full equations for these functions are given in Table 1, wheren= 4for Rosenbrock, Levy, and Ankle;n= 20for Sphere. We selectedn= 4for three of these functions be- cause this problem dimensionality represents a threshold beyond which simpler meth- ods (e.g. grid or random search) are less effective for experimental optimization, and optimization algorithms become increasingly necessary. While the Rosenbrock, Levy, and Sphere functions typically have a minimum of 0 (Rosenbrock, 1960; Dixon, 1978; Laguna and Marti, 2005), we added 100, 10, and 0.67 to these functions so that multiplicative noise would continue to have an effect even as the optimizer approached the minima. 0.67 was chosen for the Sphere function so that its minimum would be of similar magnitude to the Ankles minimum; 100 and 10 were selected for Rosenbrock and Levy to give optimization runs a realistic chance to reach the fine convergence threshold in the presence of the noise we applied. Inf Ankle,x 1, x2,x3, andx 4 represent the exoskeleton peak torque, peak time, rise time, and fall time, respectively, which are described by Zhang et al. (2017). During optimization, noise was added based on the selected measurement time ti (Figure 3), representing how during actual experiments, the noise from a mea- surement is dependent on the time allocated to that measurement. For a given can- didate, the true fitness was first calculated (Table 1), then noise was introduced as ynoisy =y true ·(1+noise), wherenoiseis a random sample fromN(0, ϵ i), andϵ i =E(t i). We use multiplicative noise to be consistent with real metabolic data from exoskele- ton optimization, where the amount of noise present in energy cost measurements in- creases with increasing energy cost. We used an error modelE(t)calculated from data collected in a previous study (Zhang et al., 2017), which consisted of 88 total trials. For Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x11 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins sample time t sample noise ε parameters [x1 ... xN] CMA-ES random noise based on time-noise relationship true cost noisy cost new parameters cost landscape x1 x2 sample timeAS-CMA Figure 3: Representation of numerical simulation framework. Given a set of candidate parameters, the simulation first determines the true cost (using a ground-truth cost landscape) and the desired sample time (using AS-CMA, which is shown, or a fixed sample time, not shown). Then, noise is introduced to the true cost based on the chosen sample time, producing the noisy cost. This noisy cost is returned to CMA-ES, which then generates new candidates to assess, and AS-CMA, for updating ofk avg andy avg. this model, percent error for a given sample time was calculated by comparing the es- timated metabolic cost for that sample time versus the cost estimated using the entire 6 minute trial. We chose minimum and maximum allowable sample times for simulated optimization of 0.5 and 5.5 minutes, which corresponded to error standard deviations of 34.2% and 0.4%. The minimum sampling time was based on the requirement that human users of exoskeleton assistance require approximately 30 seconds to adapt to assistance; the maximum sampling time was selected based on the time that is consid- ered sufficient to allow a human to come to steady state Slade et al. (2022). Finally, an additional 3% of baseline noise was added to the noise magnitude to reflect that even a full 6 minute trial is likely not perfectly accurate relative to an even longer trial, where other biomechanical changes such as gait strategy and neuromuscular adaptation could stabilize. For each test function,N= 100optimization runs were completed for each static sampling time and AS-CMA. Throughout optimization, the amount of simulated ex- periment time was tracked based on the time allocated to each sample, which allowed for optimization outcomes to be framed in terms of real-world experiment time. For all runs, we used the typical CMA-ES framework and parameter values described by Hansen (2016) and deployed in thecmaeslibrary (Nomura and Shibata, 2024), with the exception that the current generation’s mean parameter value was inserted as the final candidate of each generation, reflecting established practice in human-in-the-loop optimization (Zhang et al., 2017; Slade et al., 2022). Initialization for each optimiza- tion run was chosen from a random uniform distribution over the space for all cost Table 1: Ground-truth test functions used for simulated optimization. Function Bounds fRosenbrock(x) = 100 +Pn−1 i=1 h 100 xi+1−x2i 2+ (1−xi)2 i xi ∈[−5.12,5.12]fori= 1, . . . , n f20DSphere(x) = 0.67 +Pn i=1x2i xi ∈[0,1]fori= 1, . . . , n fLevy(x) = sin2(πw1) +Pn−1 i=1(wi −1)21 + 10 sin2(πwi + 1) +(wn −1)21 + sin2(2πwn)+ 10, wherewi = 1 +xi−1 4 fori= 1, . . . , nxi ∈[−10,10]fori= 1, . . . , n fAnkle(x) = 1 + 0.95 (e−x1 −1) + (x2 −1)2+ 0.1(x3 −0.2)2+x24 x1 ∈[0,1],x2 ∈[0.1,0.55], x3 ∈[0.1,0.4],x4 ∈[0.05,0.2] 12Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise landscapes except Ankle, which was started at the same, moderate-cost initial value to reflect real-world exoskeleton optimization methodology (Poggensee and Collins, 2021). Initialization was kept consistent between run numbers (i.e. thenth run of each sampling strategy started at the same point). All parameter values were scaled to be between 0 and 1 and the initial step size was set toσ= 0.3as recommended by Hansen (2016). In AS-CMA runs, we setˆymin to 0.6 for the 20D Sphere and Ankle test cases, and to 0 for Rosenbrock and Levy. Forˆy max, we used 1.3 for 20D Sphere and Ankle, 1000 for Rosenbrock, and 250 for Levy. These values were chosen to be in the appropriate range but intentionally imprecise relative to the ground-truth cost functions, reflect- ing how an experimenter might provide imperfect AS-CMA settings before running optimization. 2.5 Comparison with KL-KG CMA-ES To evaluate AS-CMA’s performance versus dynamic resampling techniques, we con- ducted optimization using the method proposed in Groves and Branke (2018), which we will refer to as Kullback Leibler Knowledge Gradient (KL-KG) CMA-ES. This method uses the KG method to minimize the KL divergence between successive CMA- ES sampling distributions, thereby prioritizing candidate evaluations expected to yield the greatest information gain about the optimal region. KL-KG CMA-ES begins by sampling each candidaten 0 times to estimate initial fitness values and compute the CMA-ES distribution(m,Σ)at the start of each generation. It then allocates additional samples to selected candidates until the generation’s total sampling budgetN total is exhausted (the total sampling budget is referred to asNin the original manuscript, but we will useN total here for clarity). These candidates are selected based on their expected contribution to improving the CMA-ES distribution: for each candidatea i, KL-KG estimates the probabilityP i that an additional sample will change the current elite setI µ t based on the candidate’s current estimated fitnessS i and the noise model σ. This noise model must be defined before the start of optimization (which is also a requirement for AS-CMA). The algorithm then computes the corresponding hypothet- ical update to the CMA-ES parameters(m i,Σ i). The value of sampling each candidate is then quantified asV i =P i DKL   N(m i,Σ i)∥ N(m,Σ)  ,whereD KL(·∥·)denotes the KL divergence between the updated and current CMA-ES distributions. The candidate with the highestV i is sampled next. For our tests, we conductedN= 100optimization runs for each of the four land- scapes. As in the CMA-ES tests, these 100 runs were performed for each static duration to provide KL-KG CMA-ES with the best opportunity to demonstrate its strongest per- formance. We implemented the optimization and candidate selection procedures de- scribed in Groves and Branke (2018) and empirically tuned the initial number of sam- ples per candidaten 0 and the total sampling budget per generationN total, resulting in n0 = 1andN total = 20. 2.6 Comparison with Bayesian Optimization Static sampling Bayesian optimization was tested to identify comparative strengths and weaknesses between it and AS-CMA during noisy optimization.N= 100Bayesian optimization runs were completed for each static sample time for the Ankle and 20D Sphere landscapes, andN= 50runs were completed for the Rosenbrock and Levy landscapes due to computing cluster time limitations during the surrogate model fit- ting step. Bayesian optimization (Nogueira, 2014) settings were chosen to align with those found most successful by Kutulakos and Slade (2024) to enable comparison with Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x13 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins this work. The Gaussian process, which is used to model the cost landscape with meanµ(x)and uncertaintyσ(x)as successive candidates are assessed, was modeled using a Matern kernel and a noise model assuming constant-variance (homoscedastic) noise across the cost landscape. Unlike in the AS-CMA and KL-KG CMA-ES tests, the Bayesian optimizer did not utilize the known multiplicative noise model, which may have put the Bayesian optimizer at a disadvantage when comparing the algorithms’ performance. The acquisition function, which selects the points in the landscape to evaluate, sought to minimize the lower confidence bound, i.e.arg max x (µ(x)−κσ(x)) (Srinivas et al., 2009). The exploration constantκ, which defines the optimizer’s choice to explore novel regions of the cost landscape versus continuing sampling in promising regions, was kept at the optimizer package’s value of 2.6 (Nogueira, 2014), which corre- sponds approximately to the 99% confidence interval of a standard normal distribution. κwas decayed asκ←0.93·κafter every sample to create a gradual shift from explo- ration to exploitation as optimization progressed. The true cost of the best posterior mean derived from noisy optimization was used to compute Bayesian optimization- estimated optimum at each optimization timestep. 2.7 Analysis To evaluate how sampling strategies influence the accuracy of the CMA-ES sorting step, we used Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient (Spearman’sρ) (Spearman, 1904). This measure was chosen because it quantifies the strength and direction of the relationship between two ranked variables, thereby reflecting how closely noisy estimated costs’ ordering align with the ground truth ordering. Aρvalue of 1 corresponds to perfect ordering, while 0 indicates no relationship between the noisy and true orders. Values ofρcloser to 1 are preferred, as a correctly ranked set of candidates should guide the optimizer toward a minimum. However, aρof exactly 1 is not essential, as CMA- ES’s population-based iterations allow it to tolerate some noise, and achieving perfect ranking accuracy would likely require prolonged measurements for each candidate. Spearman’sρwas calculated for theλcandidates in each generation, then averaged across all 100 runs at each time point for each sampling strategy. To assess convergence during the optimization run, we first defined the true min- imumy ∗ asy ∗ =f true(x∗), wherex ∗ is the value of the parameters that minimize the ground truth cost landscapef true. At each generationgin an optimization run, the true cost of the estimated optimum is defined asˆy ∗ =f true(ˆx∗), whereˆx∗ is the CMA-ES mean value parameter valuem g. We considered both “coarse” and “fine” convergence thresholds, which is the point where theˆy∗ achieved and stayed within 20% and 5% of the true minimumy ∗ for the remainder of the run. The 20% threshold was chosen to re- flect a minimum viable outcome in human-in-the-loop exoskeleton optimization, based on the observation that generic assistance often achieves approximately 80% of the ben- efit of optimized assistance (Poggensee and Collins, 2021), suggesting that surpassing this level indicates a meaningful improvement. The 5% threshold was selected as a threshold representing practical convergence, where further optimization may yield diminishing returns, particularly given that this value is comparable to the noise floor of metabolic cost measurements (Zhang et al., 2017). For each optimization run, we evaluated the two convergence thresholds using three metrics: 1.Time to convergence: The time forˆy ∗ to get to and stay within the coarse or fine threshold of the true minimum value. This metric represents the need to minimize 14Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise thetime burdenof optimization. In this paper, time refers to simulated experiment time, not compute time. 2.Cumulative cost to convergence: The total cost of all tested conditions required to reach convergence. This metric represents the need to minimize the totalcost bur- denof optimization. This metric was motivated by exoskeleton optimization - dur- ing optimization, we would like to minimize the total amount of metabolic energy the participant spends on walking across all conditions. Cumulative cost to con- vergence would allow us to discriminate between two optimization strategies that achieve a threshold at the same time, but have different energetic expenditures across the course of optimization. 3.Convergence reliability: The percentage of runs that achieve convergence. This met- ric illustrates the tradeoff between rapid convergence and reliable convergence. This metric represents the need to minimize thererun burden, or the likelihood that an optimization run will not find a quality solution on its first run and will need to be run again. For runs that did not converge, we assigned a time to convergence equal to the end time of optimization, and a cumulative cost to convergence equal to the sum of the true costs of all conditions tested. We chose not to enforce any additional penalties on these metrics for non-converging runs because non-convergence would be made evident by the convergence reliability metric. To compare static and adaptive sampling approaches, a determination of the single best static sampling time for CMA-ES and Bayesian optimization for each cost land- scape was necessary. The best static sampling time was determined by quantifying each static run’s performance in each of the six metrics, normalizing those performance values to each of the six performance scores assigned to AS-CMA, and then summing across the six scores. Any static sampling time that did not achieve fine convergence in at least 90% of runs was excluded from consideration for best static time. Comparison between convergence time and convergence cost was made using a two-tailed unpaired t-test; all tests used a significance level ofp= 0.05. 2.8 Laboratory Pilot Exoskeleton Optimization To qualitatively validate the results found in the simulated optimization tests, we con- ducted an exoskeleton optimization experiment withN= 1participant (male, 26 years, 172 cm, 62 kg) using a bilateral tethered ankle exoskeleton (Poggensee and Collins, 2021), with metabolic cost as an objective function (CPET, COSMED). Opti- mization was conducted following the human-in-the-loop CMA-ES optimization pro- tocol (Poggensee and Collins, 2021; Zhang et al., 2017), with one modification: instead of using a fixed 2 minute sample time, measurement time for each condition was cho- sen using AS-CMA from the range of 0.5 to 5.5 minutes. After optimization, the energy cost of every mean candidate was evaluated for 3 minutes twice in a double reversal (ABCCBA) format, and normalized to the energy cost of walking with the exoskeleton applying zero torque. The progression of the mean parameter values and the cost of the mean were used to assess if optimization would approach the expected optimum identified from previous ankle exoskeleton experiments. We expected the optimizer to identify that high peak torque at a late peak time was optimal, and that optimal assis- tance would achieve approximately a 39% reduction in energy cost of walking relative to walking with the exoskeleton turned off (Poggensee and Collins, 2021). All experi- mental protocols were approved by Stanford University IRB (IRB-48749). Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x15 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins Figure 4: Average (±1standard deviation) selected condition time by AS-CMA. 3 Results 3.1 AS-CMA selection of sample time AS-CMA selected short sample times at the start of optimization runs and generally increased the condition sample time as the run progressed (Figure 4). This trend was likely a consequence of the optimizer approaching shallower parts of the cost land- scape, where candidates were more similar and therefore more difficult to sort. The chosen sample times varied with cost landscape, demonstrating how AS-CMA adapts to different optimization problems. 3.2 Sorting accuracy Over the course of optimization, sorting accuracy generally decreased for all sampling strategies as the optimizer moved towards shallower regions of the cost landscape (Fig- ure 5). AS-CMA had favorable accuracy throughout optimization, starting withρbe- tween 0.87 and 0.93, and maintaining this accuracy throughout the optimization run (Ankle and 20D Sphere) or losing accuracy at the end of optimization (Rosenbrock and Levy). For all test landscapes, average sorting accuracy stayed high further into the op- timization run than any of the static durations, indicating the selected sample times for candidates were long enough to achieve appropriate sorting in the CMA-ES selection step. Sorting accuracy remained high throughout the optimization for the Ankle and 20D Sphere functions, while in Rosenbrock and Levy functions exhibited a decline near the end of the run. This falloff is likely due to the optimizer reaching very shallow parts of the cost landscape, where candidates’ cost differences were very small relative to the noise. We expect that, had optimization been continued for long enough, AS-CMA would have reached this accuracy falloff point in all of the cost landscapes as it honed in on a minimum point. At that point, even the small amount of error introduced by the longest allowable sample time would make sorting these similar-costing candidates increasingly difficult, resulting in decreased sorting accuracy. For static time sampling, ρcorrelated with sample time: the longer the sampling time, the greater the starting accuracy, and the longer this accuracy was sustained. AS-CMA had the highestρfor all four landscapes when averaged across all runs and all time points. The point where accuracy began to decline was later for AS-CMA than for all static times, this falloff is likely due to the selected sample time approached the maximum allowable sampling time. The favorable sorting accuracy of AS-CMA in all stages of optimization suggests the algorithm’s gradual increase in selected sampling times (Figure 4) contributed to 16Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise Figure 5: Generation sorting accuracy (Spearman’sρ) over optimization runs. Triangles denote the average across all optimization time points for that landscape. the sustained high level of sorting accuracy, ultimately making the optimizer more ef- ficient. 3.3 Cost of estimated optimum over time For all sample times, the true cost of the CMA-ES-estimated optimum asymptotically decreased over time (Figure 6); the rate of this decrease and the value of the asymptote varied with sample time. For short static sample times, cost generally decreased rapidly at the start of optimization, but approached an asymptote that was distant from the true minimum. For longer static sample times, the rate of cost decrease was slower, but functions approached a minimum value that was closer to the global minimum. AS-CMA combined these traits: it quickly reduced cost at the start of optimization (although not as fast as the shortest sample times), yet, at the end of optimization had still found the lowest-costing estimated optimum for all four cost landscapes. 3.4 Convergence reliability Across 100 runs in each of the four cost landscapes, AS-CMA achieved coarse conver- gence in all 400 runs, and fine convergence in 393 runs. For static sample times, longer times more reliably reached fine convergence, while the shortest sample times often did not achieve fine convergence (Figure 7, first row). Nearly all sample times reliably attained coarse convergence (Figure 6). While average cost trajectories for shorter sam- pling durations may appear to cross the fine convergence threshold earlier (Figure 6), Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x17 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins Figure 6: True cost of estimated optimum of CMA-ES runs using either static (colored) or adaptive (black) sampling. Lines represent the average overN= 100runs for each sampling strategy. The higher and lower dashed lines indicate the coarse and fine con- vergence thresholds. Vertical axes are normalized to the cost of the point where opti- mization was initialized. many individual runs fail to remain below the threshold due to high variability in the CMA-ES mean, which results in fewer short-duration runs satisfying the convergence criterion (Figure 7, first row), and therefore larger costs and times to convergence (Fig- ure 7, second and third rows). In contrast, longer sampling times produce more stable cost estimates, allowing a higher proportion of runs to meet and maintain fine conver- gence. 3.5 Static sample time performance The overall performance of static CMA-ES sample times formed a Pareto frontier, where shorter sample times achieved coarse objectives, but displayed poor consistency in achieving fine objectives, while long sample times reached both thresholds more slowly (Figure 6). The shortest sample times often did not have 90% of runs achieve the fine convergence threshold, meaning those sample times were not considered for best static sample time. Moderate-length sample times returned favorable results in both coarse and fine objectives, although notably, the time of the best static sample time varied depending on the cost landscape. The best CMA-ES sample time for Ankle, Rosenbrock, Levy, and 20D Sphere was 4, 3, 2, and 3.5 minutes, respectively. Percent- age comparisons between these best static sampling methods and AS-CMA across the 18Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x Improving CMA-ES in the presence of noise Figure 7: Performance metrics for various static CMA-ES and AS-CMA optimization runs. Row 1: Convergence rate. Static sampling strategies that did not achieve fine convergence on 90% or more runs (gray dashed line) are indicated in the next two rows with white fill colors. Row 2: Convergence time. Row 3: Convergence costs. Values in the second and third rows are normalized to AS-CMA, where smaller values indicate better performance. Whiskers for the second and third rows represent one standard deviation. different convergence metrics are given in the Appendix. 3.6 Time to convergence For all tested cost landscapes, AS-CMA was able to achieve coarse and fine convergence more quickly than all static sampling times (Figure 7, second row). As compared to this best static sample time for the four landscapes, AS-CMA was 24 to 65% faster at achieving fine convergence (p <0.05for Ankle, Rosenbrock, and 20D Sphere,p= 0.14for Levy) and 32 to 67% faster at achieving coarse convergence (p <0.05for all landscapes). AS-CMA seemed to perform much better than CMA-ES in the Ankle and Rosenbrock landscapes, and closer to, but still better than, the best static sampling time in Levy and 20D Sphere. The standard deviation of the time to convergence for AS- CMA was also notably smaller than that of static times, suggesting a more consistent overall performance by the adaptive sampling approach. Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x19 R. M. Martin and S. H. Collins CMA-ES Figure 8: True cost of estimated optimum over Bayesian optimization comparison ex- periment (N= 100runs for all except Rosenbrock and Levy static Bayesian optimiza- tion runs, which wereN= 50). The best CMA-ES static sample time (gray line) was 4, 3, 2, and 3.5 minutes for Ankle, Rosenbrock, Levy, and 20D Sphere, respectively. The higher and lower dashed lines indicate the coarse and fine convergence thresholds. The vertical axes are normalized to the cost of the AS-CMA and CMA-ES optimization starting points, which were the same across sampling strategies. 3.7 Cumulative cost to convergence Short sample times had favorable costs to coarse convergence, but poor costs to fine convergence, while longer times had higher relative costs to coarse convergence and lower costs to fine convergence. When the sampling strategy converged quickly, it also did so with lower cumulative cost, and vice versa (Figure 7, third row). This is explained by the plot of mean cost over time (Figure 6), which indicates that the shape of the cost over time is approximately an exponential decay shape across all sampling strategies. As compared to the best static sampling time on each landscape, AS-CMA converged to the fine threshold 29 to 76% faster, and to the coarse threshold 36 to 76% faster (p <0.05for all landscapes and thresholds). 3.8 Comparison to KL-KG CMA-ES Static sampling KL-KG CMA-ES was similarly affected by sample time as CMA-ES: shorter measurement times resulted in fast convergence to poor-quality solutions, while longer measurement times caused slower convergence to higher-quality solu- 20Evolutionary Computation Volume x, Number x