A Versatile Knee Exoskeleton Mitigates Quadriceps Fatigue in Lifting, Lowering, and Carrying Tasks Nikhil V. Divekar1,*, Gray C. Thomas1,2, Avani R. Yerva1, Hannah B. Frame1, Robert D. Gregg1,* 1University of Michigan – Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor, USA 2Texas A&M University – College Station, USA Abstract The quadriceps are particularly susceptible to fatigue during repetitive lifting-lowering and carrying (LLC), affecting worker performance, posture, and ultimately lower-back injury risk. Although robotic exoskeletons have been developed and optimized for specific use cases like lifting-lowering, their controllers lack the versatility or customizability to target critical muscles across many fatiguing tasks. Here we present a task-adaptive knee exoskeleton controller that automatically modulates virtual springs, dampers, and gravity and inertia compensation to assist squatting, level walking, and ramp and stairs ascent/descent. Unlike end-to-end neural networks, the controller is composed of predictable, bounded components with interpretable parameters that are amenable to both data-driven optimization for biomimetic assistance and subsequent application-specific tuning, for example, maximizing quadriceps assistance over multi-terrain LLC. When deployed on a backdrivable knee exoskeleton, the assistance torques holistically reduced quadriceps effort across multi-terrain LLC tasks (significantly except for level walking) in 10 human users without user-specific calibration. The exoskeleton also significantly improved fatigue-induced deficits in time-based performance and posture during repetitive lifting-lowering. * ndivekar@umich.edu; rdgregg@umich.edu. Author contributions: Conceptualization: NVD, RDG Data Curation: NVD Formal Analysis: NVD, ARY Funding Acquisition: RDG Investigation: NVD, HBF Methodology: NVD, GCT, HBF, RDG Funding acquisition: RDG Project administration: HBF, RDG Software: NVD, GCT, ARY Supervision: RDG Visualization: NVD Writing – original draft: NVD, ARY , RDG Writing – review & editing: NVD, RDG Competing interests: Authors declare that they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: The paper, its supplementary materials, and Dryad dataset (DOI: 10.5061/dryad.z34tmpgks) contain all the necessary data to assess the conclusions. Datafile S1: Session 1—for each participant and condition: normalized EMG profiles and mean values for each LLC task; exoskeleton torque, GRF, sagittal knee angle, sagittal thigh angle, and sagittal shank angle profiles for each LLC task. Datafile S2: Session 2— for each participant and condition: repetition duration, thorax lean (raw and deviation), and peak knee angle (raw and deviation) across LL trial progression; 10 post-fatigue squat LL repetition completion time deficit; mean thorax lean (raw and deviation) and mean peak knee angle (raw and deviation) of 10 post-fatigue squat LL repetitions; post-fatigue modified QUEST feedback ratings for each LLC task. HHS Public Access Author manuscript Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Published in final edited form as: Sci Robot. 2024 September 18; 9(94): eadr8282. doi:10.1126/scirobotics.adr8282. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Finally, the system facilitated seamless task transitions and garnered high effectiveness ratings post-fatigue over a multi-terrain circuit. These findings indicate this versatile control framework can target critical muscles across multiple tasks, specifically mitigating quadriceps fatigue and its deleterious effects. One-Sentence Summary: A task-adaptive knee exoskeleton mitigates the effects of fatigue during lifting, lowering, and carrying over multiple terrains. INTRODUCTION Fatigue is inevitable and detrimental in physically demanding jobs. According to the National Safety Council (USA), 69% of workers across the construction, manufacturing, transportation, and utility industries get fatigued, increasing the risk of injuries and incidents on the job (1). Fatigue causes a decrease in workers’ cognitive and physical performance in their assigned tasks (2, 3). This fatigue-induced performance decline becomes crucially deleterious (injurious) when a minimum performance level is imposed by factors outside the workers’ control, such as lifting and placing objects on a conveyor belt ( 4). More than a million people in the USA suffered a non-fatal work-related musculoskeletal disorder in 2021 (5), most commonly lower back pain (6), and such injuries cost employers millions of dollars annually in worker compensation (7). Repeated lifting-lowering (LL) activities are highly associated with overexertion and lower back pain (8). There are two common lifting techniques: stooping—lifting with the back and a flexed lumbar spine—and squatting—lifting with the legs while maintaining a neutral lumbar spine (9). Comparatively, stooping consumes less energy (10) and is associated with less perceived lower-limb exertion and fatigue (11,12), whereas squatting is associated with less lumbar shear forces and lumbar passive tissue stress (13, 14). The squat technique is favored by people who have previously incurred lower back injuries (15, 16), as squatting prioritizes the safety of the ligaments and discs of the lumbar spine over the muscles of the lower limbs (14, 17). Moreover, the national workplace labor guidelines (18), military manual lifting guidelines (19, 20), and most physical therapists (21) recommend the squat technique to prevent lower back pain, especially for lifting weights placed between the feet. Overall, squatting is often considered safer but is more energetically demanding and fatiguing on the quadriceps (22). Quadriceps fatigue has been shown to influence lifting technique, causing a transition from squatting to stooping as fatigue progresses (23). Consequently, high quadriceps fatigue is associated with higher effort of the lower back extensor muscles during repeated LL (24), increasing the chance of overuse injuries. The quadriceps are also critically involved in load carrying tasks (25) including ramps and stairs, which are frequently performed in many work environments (18, 26-29). Although injuries are less common during carrying (30), these demanding activities further contribute to quadriceps fatigue (31) and subsequent injury risk during LL. Hence, solutions are needed to reduce contributions to quadriceps Divekar et al. Page 2 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript fatigue during lifting, lowering, and carrying (LLC) and mitigate the deleterious effects of fatigue on LL where most injuries occur. Although passive knee orthoses (exoskeletons) have been developed to support the quadriceps during LL (32, 33), a fixed spring (even with a mechanical clutch) cannot adapt assistance over a variety of carrying tasks, especially those requiring net positive work. Similarly, passive hip-back devices can reduce lumbar moments during forward bending (34) but hinder hip flexion or lumbar flexion in walking (35). Newer commercial devices like the HeroWear Apex exosuit can be manually disengaged with a clutch when unrestricted lumbar flexion and/or hip flexion is desired (36), but the device then acts as a dead weight during multi-terrain carrying tasks. Robotic exoskeletons can adapt their assistance (including net changes in work) as the task changes (37, 38), but existing designs for LL lack the versatility to support multiple carrying tasks. The robotic hip-back exoskeleton in (39) effectively supported LL but hindered walking. A subsequent study (40) overcame this limitation by classifying between lifting- lowering-carrying (LLC) tasks, but the classifier was prone to errors and lacked multiple terrains. Moreover, these hip-back devices do not directly support the quadriceps muscles that are critically involved in both squatting and load carrying. Using a combination of classification and human torque estimation, the hip-knee-ankle exoskeleton in (41) reduced activation of one quadriceps muscle during LL and the swing-phase of walking, but did not support multiple terrains. A powered ankle exoskeleton reduced quadriceps activation by leveraging the closed-chain dynamics of squatting to induce helpful reaction torques at the knee (42-44). However, this dynamics phenomenon does not extend to the open-chain (single-support) phases of carrying. Even though the commercial knee exoskeleton ROAM Forge can directly support the quadriceps during squatting tasks, it needs to be manually disabled for dynamic gait since its pneumatic actuator impedes swing knee flexion (45). Although recent quasi-direct drive actuators (46, 47) are sufficiently backdrivable and torque dense to dynamically assist the knee, related devices have only reduced quadriceps effort and/or metabolic cost during LL (48, 49). A versatile control strategy is needed for backdrivable knee exoskeletons to minimize quadriceps fatigue during multi-terrain LLC and mitigate the consequences of fatigue during riskier LL tasks. Although versatile controllers have been proposed for specific use cases, they lack the practicality, generality, or customizability for many applications like multi-terrain LLC. One approach is to provide torques directly proportional to electromyography (EMG) measurements (50), but surface EMG electrodes are cumbersome to set up and are sensitive to positioning, sweat, and pressure from the exoskeleton. Another approach is to command torques proportional to biological torque, which generally aligns with muscle activation. For example, ankle torques can be directly estimated from the vertical ground reaction force (GRF) measured from an insole (51), but dynamic modeling errors and missing GRF components present substantial issues for more proximal joints. Alternatively, explicit representations of gait phase and task can parameterize a biomimetic torque model derived from human data. Machine learning methods are commonly used to classify between discretized activity modes (52), but this does not allow adaptation to continuous variations in the environment or user behavior. Continuous adjustments in biomimetic ankle torque Divekar et al. Page 3 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript were achieved by estimating gait phase, ground incline, and walking speed in (53), but such phase models struggle with rapid transitions to/from stationary tasks like LL. Instead of explicitly representing tasks, emerging task-agnostic control approaches implicitly encode task-dependent input signals into an end-to-end mapping to biomimetic output torque. Recently, an end-to-end neural network trained from device-specific human data enabled a hip exoskeleton to predict and apply a fraction of human hip torques across multiple activities, reducing the users’ metabolic cost for level walking and ramp ascent ( 54). Although valuable for some use cases, this global measure of effort is less pertinent when performance or posture is compromised by fatigue of a specific muscle group. This approach has also not been validated for the more variable kinetics of the knee, which change rapidly during certain task transitions such as walking to stair ascent. In general, “black box” learning methods lack formal safety guarantees for out-of-distribution input data and interpretable parameters for customization to different use cases or individuals (for example, via human-in-the-loop optimization (42, 55)). Our group has investigated another task-agnostic framework based on the nonlinear control method of energy shaping, which alters the dynamics (such as potential and inertial forces) of the human-exoskeleton system in closed loop by applying joint torques as functions of the current system state (angles and velocities) (56, 57). The solutions to partial differential equations called the “matching conditions” determine the realizable alterations to the dynamics of an underactuated system, which can be used to define a set of admissible torque basis functions that parameterize the controller. Based on the spring-loaded inverted pendulum walking model, our early work (56) utilized a minimal basis set (including gravity compensation and virtual springs and dampers) to provide assistive knee and ankle torques for incline, decline, and level walking. Though intuitive and provably safe (via passivity/stability analysis), this controller could only handle limited walking tasks and its assistance torque was not biomimetic. Our recent work (57) used human data to optimize the coefficients of a large set of torque bases to closely predict average torques given average kinematic inputs over the primary activities of daily life (including sit-stand, ramps, and stairs). However, optimizing over hundreds of non-intuitive torque bases made this method susceptible to overfitting the training data and impractical to tune for more effective assistance—experiments demonstrated inconsistent muscle effort reductions across tasks, with a particular penalty for the hamstrings. In summary, the exoskeleton field has crucial gaps related to the LLC use case and task- agnostic control in general. Prior devices are not sufficiently versatile to reduce contributions to quadriceps fatigue over multi-terrain LLC, and they have unknown efficacy at mitigating the effects of fatigue during LL tasks where most injuries occur. Further, emerging task- agnostic control methods lack interpretable parameters to customize their benefits for specific use cases, and more generally lack predictability and safety guarantees outside of their training distribution. This paper addresses these gaps with an energy-based control strategy implemented on a highly-backdrivable, bilateral knee exoskeleton (M-BLUE) to deliver safe, versatile assistance to the quadriceps across multi-terrain LLC tasks (Fig. 1). The controller uses phase- and task-sensitive signals to modulate a minimal set of intuitive, predictable, and bounded torque basis functions corresponding to gravity and inertia compensation and virtual springs and dampers (Fig. 2). The associated parameters Divekar et al. Page 4 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript are amenable to both data-driven optimization for biomimetic assistance and subsequent application-specific tuning, for example, maximizing quadriceps assistance across LLC tasks. The quasi-direct drive actuators of the M-BLUE knee exoskeleton (48) enable this controller to augment voluntary motion with meaningful output torques yet minimal backdrive torques. Experiments with ten (non-disabled) participants tested our hypotheses that this versatile knee exoskeleton would 1) reduce quadriceps effort across multi-terrain LLC tasks in a non-fatigued state, 2) mitigate performance during highly-fatigued repetitive LL when squatting posture is enforced, and 3) facilitate seamless task transitions (without specific training data) and garner high effectiveness ratings post-fatigue over a multi-terrain circuit. The results indicate this exoskeleton control framework can serve as a foundation for targeting critical muscles across multiple tasks, specifically mitigating quadriceps fatigue and its deleterious effects. RESULTS Our multi-terrain LLC controller adapts to tasks based on heuristic modification and modulation of several torque basis functions corresponding to gravity and inertia compensation and virtual springs and dampers (see control diagram in Fig. 2 and associated details in Methods). The coefficients of the basis functions were first chosen using data- driven optimization to match controller torques (given reference human kinematic/GRF inputs) to scaled reference human torques over multiple tasks as done in (57). The optimized controller torques match the reference human torques well in Fig. S1 (see Table S1 for goodness-of-fit results), demonstrating the general capability to assist squatting, level walking (LW), ramp ascent (RA), ramp descent (RD), stair ascent (SA), and stair descent (SD), including multiple speed and incline conditions, without explicit task classification. This controller was then implemented on an improved, bilateral version of our highly- backdrivable M-BLUE knee exoskeleton (9:1 gear ratio, 25 Nm peak output torque, 0% trial progression), the thorax lean trajectories for the two conditions diverge, where the exo condition tends to return back to pre-fatigue levels—a similar but less clear trend can be observed with the peak knee flexion angles which were (4 ± 13)° higher post-fatigue with exo compared to no-exo. Finally, the ensemble averaged thorax lean profiles in Fig. S8 verify that the peaks in thorax lean occurred at the bottom of the squat LL cycles as expected. Task adaptation and effectiveness ratings during continuous lifting-lowering-carrying The exoskeleton torques rapidly and appropriately adapted to varied terrains over the multi- terrain circuit. Focusing on the transition strides, the across-participant average exoskeleton torques resemble scaled human torques in Fig. 5, despite the controller not being trained on transition data. Moreover, Fig. 6 shows important exoskeleton signals and resulting assistance torque as a representative participant continuously traversed the circuit. Task- sensitive signals δAJCy and δAJCdist (defined in Fig. 6 caption and Fig. S9) change instantly at first contact with new terrain, causing instant torque adaptation (within 7 ms after contact detection) followed by consistent behavior during each steady-state activity. In particular, δAJCdist goes low during stationary tasks (activating the LL virtual spring), and δAJCy goes high during ascent tasks and low during descent tasks (activating the respective virtual spring). These signals trigger appropriate changes in assistive torque and power, delivering more positive work during ascent tasks and negative work during descent tasks. The average participant rating for exoskeleton effectiveness across these multi-terrain LLC tasks (post-fatigue) was 4.3 out of 5 on the modified Quebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction with Assistive Technology (QUEST) survey (61). The individual task averages were 4.8 for LL, 4.8 for SA, 4.3 for SD, 4.2 for RA, 4.2 for RD, and 3.6 for LW. See Fig. 7 for the distribution of ratings for the tasks. Divekar et al. Page 7 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript DISCUSSION State-of-the-art exoskeletons and their control strategies lack the versatility and customizability to target the critically-involved quadriceps during multi-terrain LLC, which comprise varied tasks including high-torque closed-chain squatting as well as open-chain gait tasks such as level walking, ramps, and stairs (see Table S2 for a summary of state-of-the-art LLC controllers). In particular, prior LLC studies have not demonstrated holistic (multi-terrain) and multifaceted (muscular, performance, postural, and perceptual) exoskeleton benefits, especially in highly-fatigued states which are correlated with injuries during LL. This paper addresses these gaps with a versatile energy-based control strategy (see Methods), which was first optimized to provide a foundational assistive controller (matching reference human torques in-silico in Fig. S1 and Table S1) and then customized to maximize quadriceps assistance during multi-terrain LLC (matching quadriceps activations in-vivo in Fig. 3). When deployed on a backdrivable knee exoskeleton, the assistance torques provided holistic reductions in quadriceps effort (Fig. 3) during multi-terrain LLC in non-fatigued conditions, significant performance and postural benefits to squat LL in a highly-fatigued condition (Fig. 4), and rapid and appropriate adaptation during task transitions (Figs. 5 and 6) with high effectiveness ratings post-fatigue on a multi-terrain circuit. Task-adaptive knee exoskeleton reduces quadriceps effort in multi-terrain LLC We found a holistic decrease in quadriceps effort (without negatively affecting the antagonistic hamstrings) across all LLC tasks in the non-fatigued session (Fig. 3). One of the main factors in these consistent findings could be our mixed in-silico and in-vivo approach to the controller development, whereas prior task-agnostic controllers (including our prior work) were limited by and restricted to the human dataset that informed their data-driven training processes (53,54,57). For example, the training data (62) used in our initial optimization lacked sufficient flexion torque during late stance (diverging from other datasets such as (63, 64)), which we resolved through in-vivo controller tuning (see supplementary methods). The peaks in assistive torques are well aligned with the peaks in quadriceps activations across tasks in Fig. 3, explaining the significant reductions in quadriceps effort in the exo condition (except for level walking). It should be noted that human muscles are much more efficient in performing negative work (as required in descent tasks) compared to positive (required in ascent tasks). It is therefore understandable that participants found the assistive torques the most helpful in the tasks requiring high positive work (Fig. 7). Indeed, stair ascent, LL, and ramp ascent had the highest reductions in quadriceps effort. On the other hand, the knee exoskeleton was least effective at assisting level walking. This task received the lowest effectiveness rating post-fatigue (3.6/5) and was also the only task which had a non-significant decrease in quadriceps effort with exoskeleton assistance. This result can be explained by the fact that level walking exhibits the lowest knee moments out of all tasks (Fig. S1), and accordingly received the lowest assistance torque magnitude (Fig. 3). These assistive torques were well aligned to the quadriceps activation profile, but we suspect that soft-tissue compliance prevented effective energy transfer from the relatively smaller Divekar et al. Page 8 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript exoskeleton torques associated with level walking. Fortunately, the presented exoskeleton/ controller satisfactorily eliminated the high peaks in late-stance hamstrings activation seen in our prior studies (57, 60), likely due to adding knee flexion torques via gravity compensation and using a significantly lighter exoskeleton. In summary, the exoskeleton successfully reduced quadriceps effort in the quadriceps-intensive tasks that contribute most to muscular fatigue, without an observed penalty. Quadriceps assistance mitigates fatigue-induced LL performance and posture deficits Fatigue is inevitable in physically demanding jobs and is a causal factor for work-related musculoskeletal disorders (1). Our results demonstrate that the exoskeleton can mitigate the deleterious effects of fatigue on LL performance (2) and posture (23), which has implications on injury risk. Neuromuscular fatigue can be quantified by the decrease in the muscle’s peak force production ability (or peak torque/moment of the corresponding joint). The peak knee torque for a fast squat is about 1.4 Nm·kg−1 (65), or about 100 Nm for an average person. During the fast LL squats performed in our study, the peak knee torque is required at the bottom of the squat to redirect the body’s downward momentum upwards. The bottom of the squat is also where we observed the peak in post-fatigue thorax lean (Fig. S8), a likely consequence of participants trying to reduce the moment arm on the knee (and stress on the fatigued quadriceps) in this biomechanically compromised position. The peak of the exoskeleton torque profile was well aligned with this high-torque squat phase (providing about 25% of biological torque), resulting in good alignment with the quadriceps EMG peaks (Fig. 3). Accordingly, exoskeleton assistance yielded a 22% reduction in mean quadriceps effort and a 23% decrease in peak activation for non-fatigued LL. This result is in line with the ∼18% reduction in quadriceps activation during lowering in (49), but differs from the 60% reduction found with just 16 Nm peak assistance torque (66). However, the participants in (66) had a highly bent-over posture during the squat lifts, suggesting a much lower net knee extension torque was required for their task (for which 16 Nm is a higher percentage). A fatiguing squat study reported a 25% decline in maximal quadriceps force after fatiguing exercises (67), but we did not measure maximal quadriceps forces pre- and post-fatigue in our study. If we make relatively broad assumptions of a linear relationship between EMG and force (68), and consider fast LL as a maximal activity for the quadriceps, the 23% savings in peak quadriceps force afforded by the exoskeleton was likely sufficient to fully overcome the supposed 25% deficit in force from the induced fatigue. This could explain how the exoskeleton assistance enabled the participants to significantly reduce their fatigue-induced deficit in time to complete 10 LL repetitions by 43% and with significantly better posture (4.4 degrees decrease in global thorax angle) compared to no-exo. In fact, the exoskeleton assistance limited the fatigue-induced time deficit to a mere 1% increase relative to pre-fatigue levels. On the other hand, the LL durations in the no-exo condition increased substantially post-fatigue, indicating a persistent fatigue-induced performance deficit. The mean LL repetition durations prior to declaring fatigue were quite similar for both the no-exo and (passive) exo conditions, suggesting similar levels of fatigue. After participants declared fatigue, both conditions had a peak LL duration at the 1st repetition because this was when they experienced peak fatigue. Participants were instructed to pause just Divekar et al. Page 9 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript long enough to be able to continue with proper squat form during post-fatigue repetitions; the first pause allowed recovery to a fatigue level marginally below failure, which was maintained over subsequent repetitions. The exo condition likely had a smaller pause because participants had more confidence continuing after fatigue when assistance was expected. The post-fatigue LL feedback rating of 4.8 was also the highest amongst the tasks (almost a perfect 5/5)—supporting the effectiveness of the exoskeleton assistance at a perceptual level. The exoskeleton’s replenishment of the diminished quadriceps force in post-fatigue LL explains the significant reduction in peak thorax lean (amount of stooping) for the exo condition compared to no-exo. A similar rate and magnitude of increase in peak thorax lean can be observed between the no-exo and (passive) exo conditions in the fatiguing phase of the trial (−100% to 0% trial progression in Fig. 4D), indicating similar intensities of fatigue. This observation agrees with a classic study showing quadriceps fatigue leads to a compensatory change in posture (more stooping) (23). Upon onset of exoskeleton assistance (>0% trial progression), the peak thorax lean returns quickly (within 2 post- fatigue repetitions) toward a pre-fatigue level, indicating mitigation of fatigue. In contrast, the no-exo condition continues to gradually increase (reaching its highest point at the third post-fatigue repetition) before leveling off at a noticeably higher value than the pre-fatigue level, suggesting retention of high-fatigue postural effects. Without assistance, the participants likely offloaded their highly-fatigued quadriceps by leaning forward and thus reducing the moment arm on their knees. In contrast, exoskeleton assistance enabled participants to use more of their legs thus precluding stooping—this can be observed in the ensemble average deviation in peak knee flexion angle in Fig. S7. Moreover, although fatigue decreases peak knee flexion (hence also knee range of motion) at similar rates and magnitude in both conditions (−100% to 0% trial progression), exoskeleton assistance partially recovered the loss in range of motion (>0% trial progression), allowing for a straighter and safer back posture. Interestingly, the observed changes in posture were likely subconscious phenomena, because participants were reminded to 1) maintain proper squat posture during the fatiguing portion and 2) take a longer pause if they perceived an imminent compromise in posture during the post-fatigue portion. This likely resembles real workplace scenarios, where fatigue- induced injurious changes in posture occur subconsciously to override worker training and guidelines. Importantly, our study showed a partial reversal of compensatory changes in posture via exoskeleton assistance. This intervention addresses the root cause of postural changes (fatigued quadriceps) rather than simply alerting the user by means of a vibrator as in (69). Study limitations A possible limitation of this study was relying on participants’ perception of their point of failure to control the level of fatigue between no-exo and exo conditions. However, the self- assessed failure point—identified by a disproportionately large increase in effort to complete the desired movement with proper form—is commonly used in resistance training ( 70) and fitness tests (71). EMG has been used to estimate neuromuscular fatigue offline with mixed Divekar et al. Page 10 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript results (72), but real-time assessment for the purpose of declaring fatigue would have been impractical. Nevertheless, the similarities between conditions in repetition durations (Fig. 4B), thorax angle (Fig. 4D), and knee angle (Fig. S7) leading up to fatigue (−100% to 0% trial progressions) suggest the participants indeed reached similar levels of fatigue at failure. Additionally, the two fatiguing conditions (no-exo and exo) were performed on the same day (session 2), potentially causing greater fatigue for the second condition. This study design was intended to make it easier for participants to declare fatigue at a similar point of failure. To minimize the possible confound, we gave participants ample time to rest between conditions and alternated the order of conditions between participants. Moreover, the effect of order was non-significant in explaining the post-fatigue performance and posture outcomes. Although the observed reductions in quadriceps effort did not have an associated penalty with the hamstrings, we did not study associated changes in other leg muscles nor overall metabolic cost. It is worth noting that the RF (Fig. S4) serves as both a knee extensor and hip flexor, and the hamstrings (Fig. S5) serve as both knee flexors and hip extensors, giving some insight into hip effort. Even if other muscles had increased effort, they are less susceptible to fatigue than the quadriceps in squat LL (22) and ramp/stairs (31) tasks. By focusing on quadriceps effort, the presented knee exoskeleton improved LL posture and performance and received high subjective scores during continuous LLC trials. However, we did not examine cumulative activation of the quadriceps during these continuous trials, which is left to future work. Future work The significant reduction in quadriceps EMG during non-fatigued LL suggests the exoskeleton could also delay the onset of fatigue, which could be studied with an endurance test till failure. Future work could also integrate the presented knee exoskeleton with a hip-back brace to directly offload the lower back, helping workers lift loads that cannot be placed between the feet (due to their shape or size). Further, hip and/or ankle assistance may be necessary during frequent level-ground carrying, where a knee exoskeleton alone offers little benefit. The inherently modular nature of the knee exoskeleton presented in this study allows it to be readily interfaced with a hip-back and/or ankle exo to provide versatile assistance for LLC tasks including stooping. In fact we presented a modular knee-hip combination of our exoskeleton in prior work—albeit only performing a single LL task with a simple gravity shaping controller (48). In future work we hope to extend the control approach developed in this paper to combinations of hip-knee-ankle modules and test their efficacy in continuous LLC with various types of loads. Further, additional tasks could be supported by the presented control method, such as backwards hauling of loaded trolleys/dollies up stairs and ramps. The customizable controller can also be extended to general purpose assistance for mobility- limited individuals, such as the elderly, by modifying the LL spring for sit-stand tasks. The coefficients for the three types of springs and gravity compensation can be safely and independently tuned, enabling future customization to unique gait impairments. This control Divekar et al. Page 11 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript approach is also amenable to personalization via human-in-the-loop optimization, which requires a small set of tunable parameters (42, 55). Conclusion The presented knee exoskeleton and controller provided versatile assistance across multi- terrain LLC tasks, effectively mitigating quadriceps fatigue. These results suggest that knee exoskeletons could be deployed in physically-demanding workplaces to reduce fatigue, enhance lifting performance, and potentially reduce the risk of lower back injuries. This control framework also addresses fundamental limitations with emerging task- agnostic exoskeleton controllers, which typically lack interpretability, customizability, safety guarantees, predictability, and/or responsiveness during transitions. Achieving biomimetic torque prediction via data-driven optimization provides a general foundation, from which the small set of intuitive parameters can be customized for personalized assistance or different use cases including elderly assistance or specific gait impairments. MATERIALS AND METHODS Controller overview Our control objective was to safely, rapidly, and appropriately adapt the exoskeleton assistance torque across several common activities, specifically tailored to reducing quadriceps effort during multi-terrain LLC. To make the controller stable and predictable, we take inspiration from the energy-shaping framework previously used to design energetically passive controllers within the stance or swing phase (73). Instead of tracking reference trajectories, this style of controller can generate torques to augment the mechanical energy of the coupled human-exoskeleton system in a manner that assists various activities (for example, compensating gravity and/or inertia). A theoretical guarantee of passivity ensures the exoskeleton cannot inject net positive energy over a cycle between identical leg configurations, with the exception of instantaneous changes in potential energy when switching between distinct stance and swing controllers. This further implies that the human retains control over net energy growth, and the exoskeleton cannot cause unstable energy injection or oscillations. This guarantee is particularly important when operating outside the controller’s design/training conditions ( 74), whereas emerging neural network-based approaches such as (54) are inherently unpredictable in such circumstances. However, strict energetic passivity only allows energy injection when switching between stance and swing controllers (for example, changing the equilibrium angle of a virtual spring), which precludes continuous energy injection throughout the stride. We therefore relax the passivity requirement in our controller design to permit both small continuous injections and large event-based injections of energy as in (57). As an example of the former, we use a gravity compensation term at the knee that depends on the global angle of the shank during phases of underactuation (57). As an example of the latter, a pre-loaded ascent spring activates when the foot touches down in order to propel the user upstairs or ramps, where the amount of energy injection is a predictable function of the initial knee flexion angle. Divekar et al. Page 12 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript The approach in (57) relies on purely data-driven optimization to choose dozens of unintuitive controller parameters, which are difficult to adjust for different use cases like LLC. To build an intuitive and customizable controller (depicted in Fig. 2), we begin with a short list of physical, bounded components that obey the assumptions of (57). These components include springs, dampers, inertia compensation, and gravity compensation, and since each one maps from measurable quantities to torque, they can serve as basis functions to parameterize the control law. We then deviate from the energy shaping framework (57) by heuristically modulating these core torque bases into specialized task- and phase-specific behaviors. We obtain task-specific stance torque bases (for example, ascent spring) that are suitable for specific task categories (for example, incline walking), and general swing torque bases (modified gravity compensation) that are universally helpful in swing (in other words, task-invariant). A part of this specialization involves “phase sensitization” using a robust phase variable (75), which, for example, suppresses the ascent spring in late stance where it would hinder the transition to swing. Next, the process of “task sensitization” modulates the specialized stance torque basis functions to accommodate differences between activities and variations within activities. For example, the ascent spring injects net positive energy only for incline or upstairs tasks (with higher energy injected for steeper inclines), and a non-ascent spring-damper absorbs energy only for decline, downstairs, and level walking tasks. Essentially, task sensitization involves scaling the specialized basis functions by smooth functions of task-sensitive signals (for example, the height differential between the two ankle joint centers at heel-strike which is sensitive to terrain incline). Summing the task-sensitized stance basis functions gives the task-adaptive stance torque function which is parameterized fully by kinematic and GRF feedback. Finally, the GRF-weighted convex combination of the task-adaptive stance torque function and task-invariant swing torque function provides the final task-adaptive knee torque. See supplementary methods for a detailed description of the controller and its data-driven optimization and in-vivo customization, resulting in the parameters given in Table S3. Hardware/controller implementation The controller was implemented on an improved, bilateral version of our M-BLUE knee exoskeleton module (48) as shown in Fig. 1B. Each module had a highly-backdrivable commercial actuator (T-Motor AK80-9), comprising a high-torque pancake motor and an internal 9:1 planetary gearset. This actuator has very low reflected friction and inertia (92.1 kg·cm2), enabling high-bandwidth torque control (42 to 60 Hz cutoff (76)) without a torque sensor as commonly used with higher inertia actuators (such as 691.5 kg·cm2 in (73)). In particular, the output torque of the AK80-9 actuator can be accurately modeled as a function of q-axis motor current with less than 0.39 Nm error (48). Therefore, tracking of the desired output torque was handled by the FASTER motor driver (Dephy, Inc.) in current control mode. We bypassed the driver’s default thermal limits and implemented a thermal model-based torque limiter that smoothly tapers the actuator torque based on estimated coil temperature (77), allowing short (1-2 s) bursts of higher peak torques (limited to 25 Nm) than the default setting. We also implemented a ground reaction force sensor (IEE Sense) based on a matrix of force sensitive resistors. Finally, we improved comfort Divekar et al. Page 13 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript and practicality by attaching the Raspberry Pi computation unit on-board, implemented waist-mounted “plug-and-play” power tool batteries for better familiarity with construction workers, and included a waist suspension strap to prevent exoskeleton slipping/sliding. The Raspberry Pi embedded computer ran a 150 Hz real-time control loop for computing the task-adaptive torque commands based on sampled sensor feedback. Each torque command was converted to a q-axis motor current command (using the identified torque model from (48)) and sent to the motor driver over USB. Running its own low-level control loop at 10 kHz, the motor driver tracked the commanded q-axis current (and thus torque) before receiving the next command from the high-level control loop. Fig. S10 depicts the current/torque tracking for a representative participant performing a continuous LLC circuit traversal. Across participants, the average root-mean-squared error between commanded torque and estimated torque (measured current × gear ratio 9:1 × motor torque constant 0.146 Nm/A) was 0.61 Nm with a standard deviation of 0.05 Nm. Experimental protocol We sought to study the effects of the controller/exoskeleton on performance, posture, muscle activity, and user perception during assisted multi-terrain LLC in fatigued and non-fatigued conditions (Fig. 1A). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Michigan (HUM00201957) and associated with clinical trial number NCT05240014. Ten (n=10) participants (5 males, 5 females, age 25 ± 1 years) who had prior knowledge and experience of the squat lifting technique completed this study (see Table S4 for demographics). The experiment was divided into two sessions: non-fatiguing and fatiguing, which were completed on two separate days at least 1 week apart to provide adequate recovery time. Before the first session, participants underwent exoskeleton acclimation for approximately 15 minutes in which they traversed the multi-terrain circuit until they felt comfortably attuned to the behavior of the exoskeleton. For the ascent tasks, the experimenter explained the intuitive concept of utilizing a pre-loaded spring (likened to a spring-loaded toy car). For descent and level walking tasks, we explained the concept of a bracing knee spring that prevents knee buckling. Finally for the LL task, the concept of a velocity dependent torsion spring was explained by likening it to intent detection. For the lowering (negative work) portion, we explained that the knee spring will resist their downward motion less if it detects a stronger intention to lower (faster knee bending). For the lifting portion, since the direction of velocity and spring torque is the same, we explained the controller would feel similar to a conventional torsion spring. After the acclimation with the exoskeleton, we acquired important gait parameters of each participant in the no-exo condition for each portion of the circuit except level walking. For ascent tasks (ramp and stairs) we acquired their maximum knee extension velocity in stance, and similarly for descent tasks we acquired their maximum knee flexion velocity in stance. For LL we acquired the maximum knee extension velocity of the lifting portion. These parameters served as experimental controls in session 1. Divekar et al. Page 14 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Session 1 (non-fatiguing) protocol— The purpose of this session was to assess the effect of the exoskeleton on quadriceps effort in six tasks (LW, RA, RD, SA, SD, and squat LL) in a non-fatigued state. Accordingly, participants traversed each portion of the ramp/stairs circuit and a 10 m level walkway multiple times until we collected at least 10 gait/task cycles for each task in which the corresponding maximum velocities in stance were within ±10% of their baseline values collected during acclimation. Since level walking is relatively more common and natural than the other tasks, we did not enforce a velocity constraint and instead asked participants to walk at their self-selected speed. The tasks were repeated with both no-exo and exo conditions, with the order of the conditions alternated between subsequent participants. For the stairs and ramp descent tasks, participants were reminded to carefully walk and lower themselves down, and not skip or hop down in order to emulate safe carrying etiquette. Since a variety of stair ascent styles exist—knee dominant (most common), hip dominant, ankle dominant—it was plausible for newly acclimated participants to change their climbing style in response to the assistive knee torques, potentially confounding the EMG comparisons between conditions. We thus encouraged the participants to use the most common knee dominant style for both conditions (during both acclimation and data collection trials), which turned out to be the natural style for all participants. Session 2 (fatiguing) protocol— The purpose of session 2 was to assess the mitigating effect of the exoskeleton on post-fatigue LL performance deficit when enforcing the squat form, and to acquire a subjective assessment of its effectiveness on post-fatigue multi-terrain LLC. Accordingly, participants performed continuous squat LL repetitions with a 9 kg kettlebell until “failure” with no pausing allowed between repetitions. Participants were instructed to verbally declare failure when they felt they could no longer complete the next repetition with proper squat form without needing a pause. Declaring fatigue initiated a time trial of 10 fatigued LL repetitions in which participants were permitted to pause long enough after repetitions to complete the next repetition with perceived good squat form. The participants were oblivious to the timed nature of the trial and were instructed to focus their attention on their posture. This process was repeated without the exoskeleton and with the exoskeleton. The order of conditions was alternated between participants, and a minimum break of 15 minutes (or longer if the participant desired) was enforced between conditions. For the exoskeleton condition, the fatiguing repetitions were performed with the exoskeleton in passive mode, for which the exoskeleton has an imperceptible ∼1 Nm backdrive torque for the joint accelerations encountered during LL (48). With the use of a wireless push button, the researcher changed the exoskeleton to active mode immediately after “fatigued” was declared by the participants, providing them with assistance during the post-fatigue repetitions. Immediately after completing the 10 post-fatigue LL repetitions, the participants walked over a multi-terrain circuit while carrying the 9 kg mass. The circuit comprised a 3.7 m ramp inclined at 15°, a short level platform of 2 m, and a 5 step staircase with 18 cm step height. The circuit was traversed in a continuous, freestyle fashion in both directions and included a squat LL repetition on both ends of the circuit to emulate a workplace multi-terrain LLC scenario. Two roundtrip laps of the circuit were completed for each condition. After Divekar et al. Page 15 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript completing the circuit with the second condition, participants rated the effectiveness of the exoskeleton assistance over the circuit by filling out a modified QUEST (61) questionnaire (see Table S5 for the list of questions). The questionnaire gathered discretized ratings of 1-5 (not satisfied at all, not very satisfied, somewhat satisfied, quite satisfied, and very satisfied, respectively) for all steady-state portions of the circuit (ramp and stairs ascent/descent, level walking, LL). The participants only considered the effectiveness of the exoskeleton during the post-fatigue circuit traversal. Data collection Multi-terrain quadriceps effort— In session 1, after appropriate skin preparation, we secured five EMG electrodes (Trigno Avanti and Snap, Delsys, Massachusetts, USA) onto the participant’s right vastus medialis oblique (VMO), vastus lateralis (VL), rectus femoris (RF), biceps femoris (BF), and semitendinosus (ST) to assess quadriceps and hamstrings muscle activation. Participants performed a MVC procedure comprising explosive jump squats (eliciting maximal dynamic contraction) and maximal isometric contraction against manual resistance, which enabled EMG data to be normalized to %MVC. To assess muscular effort we calculated the mean of the MVC-normalized root-mean- squared signal for each gait/task cycle. The root-mean-squared signal provided by the Delsys EMG acquisition software was used for this purpose (window length: 125 ms, 122 ms overlap). Since we were interested in gross quadriceps effort, and to reduce the number of degrees of freedom in our statistical analysis, we took the weighted average of the 3 quadriceps muscles that we recorded to get a gross quadriceps effort metric. The weighting was based on the respective physiological cross-sectional area of each muscle as per (59). Post-fatigue LL performance deficit— Post-fatigue LL performance deficit was evaluated by the % increase in time to complete 10 LL repetitions after the participant exclaimed “fatigued” in session 2, with respect to baseline. Baseline was determined by the time to complete the first 10 LL repetitions during the pre-fatigue phase in the no-exo condition for each participant. A LL repetition started with the participant standing in the upright posture without the weight, followed by lifting the weight from the ground attaining the upright standing posture, and lastly lowering the weight back to the ground, and standing upright once again without the weight. Since some participants declared fatigue mid-way through a repetition, the time measurement was started when the last fatiguing repetition was fully completed. Since pausing between repetitions was allowed in the 10 post-fatigued repetitions, most participants took a 2-3 s pause immediately after declaring fatigue—this time was included in the time to complete metric. The time to complete analysis was performed offline using sagittal-plane video recordings. Post-fatigue LL posture deviation— Although squatting posture was an experimental control in session 2, we performed an exploratory analysis of lifting posture (peak thorax lean) to see if the exo helped participants maintain a better squat form. A Vicon motion capture system (Oxford Metrics, Oxford, UK) was used to collect three-dimensional marker trajectories for session 2’s LL trials. Retro-reflective markers on the torso were placed at C7, T10, CLA V , and STRN to define the thorax segment (78). Three additional backup Divekar et al. Page 16 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript markers were placed on the shoulders and lower back to aid in post-process gap filling. After appropriate data cleanup, gap filling, and filtering, we calculated the sagittal plane global thorax angle with respect to upright standing (zero degrees) (79). First, the peak global thorax angle was found for each lifting and lowering squat. Next, the deviation in thorax lean was calculated by subtracting the value of the lowest peak found in the pre-fatigue no-exo condition. Finally, the mean of the deviations from 20 post-fatigue squats total (10 lifts and 10 lowers) was taken for each participant and condition. Statistical analysis Our power analysis (for 80% power, alpha=0.05) on pilot data for LL performance and EMG returned a sample size of n=10. After collecting data from all ten participants, we first confirmed normality of the data using QQ-plots. Quadriceps muscular effort was analyzed using a linear mixed model in MATLAB with restricted maximum likelihood estimation of parameters. Data from our ten participants were tabulated with information comprising log-transformed quadriceps muscle effort, condition (no-exo, exo), and sex (male, female). We defined exoskeleton condition and sex as categorical variables and fit a separate linear mixed model for each task, where the condition and sex are fixed effects and participant is a random effect: Effort ∼ Condition + Sex + (1 ∣ Participant) . (1) The linear mixed model provided the effect sizes and uncorrected p-values for the fixed factors. We corrected the p-values for multiple comparisons (six tasks) using the Holm Bonferroni correction. For the post-fatigue performance and posture metrics, a similar linear mixed model included additional fixed effects of order (no-exo vs. exo condition) and pre-fatigue workload (number of LL repetitions required to fatigue), without having to correct for multiple comparisons. Workload was log-transformed prior to analysis and mean-centered for each sex and condition combination. Supplementary Material Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material. Acknowledgments: The authors thank Jianping Lin for controls consultations, Vamsi Peddinti for electronics consultations, Corey Powell for statistical consultations, Danielle Prins for sports science consultations, Elliott Rouse and Chandramouli Krishnan for data analysis consultations, Jiefu Zhang for help during experiments, Prajkta Divekar for illustrations, and Kevin Best for general help. Funding: National Institutes of Health grant R01EB031166 (RG) Divekar et al. Page 17 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript References 1. National Safety Council, Fatigue In Safety-Critical Industries Report - National Safety Council, Tech. rep (2018). URL: https://www.nsc.org/getmedia/4b5503b3-5e0b-474d-af19-c419cedb4c17/ fatigue-in-safety-critical-industries.pdf.aspx. 2. Zhang M, Murphy LA, Fang D, Caban-Martinez AJ, Influence of fatigue on construction workers’ physical and cognitive function, Occupational Medicine (Oxford, England) 65, 245–250 (2015). [PubMed: 25701835] 3. Enoka RM, Duchateau J, Translating Fatigue to Human Performance, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 48, 2228 (2016). [PubMed: 27015386] 4. CCOHS, CCOHS: Work-related Musculoskeletal Disorders (WMSDs) - Risk Factors, Tech. rep (2019). URL: https://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/diseases/wmsd/risk.pdf. 5. Employer-Reported Workplace Injuries and Illnesses - 2021, Tech. Rep. USDL-22–2139, Bureau of labor statistics (2021). URL: https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/osh.pdf. 6. Wami SD, Abere G, Dessie A, Getachew D, Work-related risk factors and the prevalence of low back pain among low wage workers: results from a cross-sectional study, BMC Public Health 19, 1072 (2019). [PubMed: 31395067] 7. The hidden impact of musculoskeletal disorders on Americans, 4th edition, Tech. rep, Bone and joint initiative USA (2018). URL: https://www.boneandjointburden.org. 8. Wang D, Dai F, Ning X, Risk Assessment of Work-Related Musculoskeletal Disorders in Construction: State-of-the-Art Review, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management 141, 04015008 (2015). Publisher: American Society of Civil Engineers. 9. Straker L, Evidence to support using squat, semi-squat and stoop techniques to lift low-lying objects, International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 31, 149–160 (2003). 10. Welbergen E, Kemper HC, Knibbe JJ, Toussaint HM, Clysen L, Efficiency and effectiveness of stoop and squat lifting at different frequencies, Ergonomics 34, 613–624 (1991). [PubMed: 1884712] 11. Hagen KB, Harms-Ringdahl K, Ratings of perceived thigh and back exertion in forest workers during repetitive lifting using squat and stoop techniques, Spine 19, 2511–2517 (1994). [PubMed: 7855674] 12. Hagen KB, Hallen J, Harms-Ringdahl K, Physiological and subjective responses to maximal repetitive lifting employing stoop and squat technique, European Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology 67, 291–297 (1993). [PubMed: 8299594] 13. Bazrgari B, Shirazi-Adl A, Arjmand N, Analysis of squat and stoop dynamic liftings: muscle forces and internal spinal loads, European Spine Journal 16, 687–699 (2007). [PubMed: 17103232] 14. Potvin JR, McGill SM, Norman RW, Trunk muscle and lumbar ligament contributions to dynamic lifts with varying degrees of trunk flexion, Spine 16, 1099–1107 (1991). [PubMed: 1948399] 15. Damkot DK, Pope MH, Lord J, Frymoyer JW, The Relationship Between Work History, Work Environment and Low-Back Pain in Men, Spine 9, 395 (1984). [PubMed: 6236564] 16. Straker L, Duncan P, Psychophysical and psychosocial comparison of squat and stoop lifting by young females, The Australian Journal of Physiotherapy 46, 27–32 (2000). [PubMed: 11676787] 17. van der Have A, Van Rossom S, Jonkers I, Squat Lifting Imposes Higher Peak Joint and Muscle Loading Compared to Stoop Lifting, Applied Sciences 9, 3794 (2019). Number: 18 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 18. Ergonomic Guidelines for Manual Material Handling, Tech. Rep. 2007–131 (2007). URL: https:// www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2007-131/pdfs/2007-131.pdf?id=10.26616/NIOSHPUB2007131. 19. Sharp Marilyn, Rosenberger Mary, Knapik Joseph, Chapter 5 – COMMON MILITARY TASK: MATERIALS HANDLING, Tech. Rep. RTO-TR-IST-999 (2006). URL: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/ pdfs/ADA472464.pdf. 20. US ARMY , Lifting techniques, Tech. rep, U.S. ARMY CENTER FOR HEALTH PROMOTION AND PREVENTIVE MEDICINE (2000). URL: https://www.sfdph.org/dph/ files/OSH/armylift.pdf. Divekar et al. Page 18 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript 21. Nolan D, O’Sullivan K, Stephenson J, O’Sullivan P, Lucock M, What do physiotherapists and manual handling advisors consider the safest lifting posture, and do back beliefs influence their choice?, Musculoskeletal Science and Practice 33, 35–40 (2018). [PubMed: 29078081] 22. Ahmad I, Kim J-Y , Assessment of Whole Body and Local Muscle Fatigue Using Electromyography and a Perceived Exertion Scale for Squat Lifting, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15, 784 (2018). [PubMed: 29670002] 23. Trafimow JH, Schipplein OD, Novak GJ, Andersson GB, The effects of quadriceps fatigue on the technique of lifting, Spine 18, 364–367 (1993). [PubMed: 8475439] 24. Sasaki M, Horio A, Wakasa M, Uemura S, Osawa Y , Influence of Quadriceps Femoris Fatigue on Low Back Load during Lifting of Loads at Different Distances from the Toes, Journal of Physical Therapy Science 20, 81–89 (2008). 25. Ghori GMU, Luckwill RG, Responses of the lower limb to load carrying in walking man, European Journal of Applied Physiology and Occupational Physiology 54, 145–150 (1985). [PubMed: 4043040] 26. Orr R, Pope R, Lopes TJA, Leyk D, Blacker S, Bustillo-Aguirre BS, Knapik JJ, Soldier Load Carriage, Injuries, Rehabilitation and Physical Conditioning: An International Approach, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 18, 4010 (2021). [PubMed: 33920426] 27. Chung MK, Lee YJ, Lee I, Choi KI, Physiological workload evaluation of carrying soft drink beverage boxes on the back, Applied Ergonomics 36, 569–574 (2005). [PubMed: 15913538] 28. Work Fit, Carrying Up Stairs & Keeping Your Workers Safe on the Job (2023). URL: https:// www.work-fit.com/blog/carrying-up-stairs-keeping-your-workers-safe-on-the-job. 29. Chung Hsiu-Chen, Wang Mao-Jiun J., The effects of container design and stair climbing on maximal acceptable lift weight, wrist posture, psychophysical, and physiological responses in wafer-handling tasks, Applied Ergonomics 32, 593–598 (2001). [PubMed: 11703045] 30. NIOSH, Engineering Controls Database - Material Handling, Tech. rep (2018). URL: https:// www.cdc.gov/niosh/engcontrols/ecd/detail25.html. 31. Givoni NJ, Pham T, Allen TJ, Proske U, The effect of quadriceps muscle fatigue on position matching at the knee, The Journal of Physiology 584, 111–119 (2007). [PubMed: 17690151] 32. Ranaweera R, Gopura R, Jayawardena T, Mann G, Development of A Passively Powered Knee Exoskeleton for Squat Lifting, Journal of Robotics, Networking and Artificial Life 5, 45 (2018). 33. Hidayah R, Sui D, Wade KA, Chang B-C, Agrawal S, Passive knee exoskeletons in functional tasks: Biomechanical effects of a SpringExo coil-spring on squats, Wearable Technologies 2, e7 (2021). Publisher: Cambridge University Press. [PubMed: 38486637] 34. Bosch T, van Eck J, Knitel K, de Looze M, The effects of a passive exoskeleton on muscle activity, discomfort and endurance time in forward bending work, Applied Ergonomics 54, 212– 217 (2016). [PubMed: 26851481] 35. Baltrusch SJ, van Dieën JH, Bruijn SM, Koopman AS, van Bennekom CAM, Houdijk H, The effect of a passive trunk exoskeleton on metabolic costs during lifting and walking, Ergonomics 62, 903–916 (2019). [PubMed: 30929608] 36. Goršič M, Song Y , Dai B, Novak D, Evaluation of the HeroWear Apex back-assist exosuit during multiple brief tasks, Journal of Biomechanics 126, 110620 (2021). [PubMed: 34293602] 37. Koopman AS, Toxiri S, Power V , Kingma I, van Dieen JH, Ortiz J, de Looze MP, The effect of control strategies for an active back-support exoskeleton on spine loading and kinematics during lifting, Journal of Biomechanics 91, 14–22 (2019). [PubMed: 31122661] 38. Heo U, Kim SJ, Kim J, Backdrivable and Fully-Portable Pneumatic Back Support Exoskeleton for Lifting Assistance, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 2047–2053 (2020). 39. Poliero T, Lazzaroni M, Toxiri S, Di Natali C, Caldwell DG, Ortiz J, Applicability of an Active Back-Support Exoskeleton to Carrying Activities, Frontiers in Robotics and AI 7 (2020). 40. Poliero T, Sposito M, Toxiri S, Natali CD, Iurato M, Sanguineti V , Caldwell DG, Ortiz J, Versatile and non-versatile occupational back-support exoskeletons: A comparison in laboratory and field studies, Wearable Technologies 2, e12 (2021). Publisher: Cambridge University Press. [PubMed: 38486626] Divekar et al. Page 19 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript 41. Sado F, Yap HJ, Ghazilla RAR, Ahmad N, Design and control of a wearable lower-body exoskeleton for squatting and walking assistance in manual handling works, Mechatronics 63, 102272 (2019). 42. Kantharaju P, Jeong H, Ramadurai S, Jacobson M, Jeong H, Kim M, Reducing Squat Physical Effort Using Personalized Assistance From an Ankle Exoskeleton, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 30, 1786–1795 (2022). [PubMed: 35759579] 43. Jeong H, Haghighat P, Kantharaju P, Jacobson M, Jeong H, Kim M, Muscle coordination and recruitment during squat assistance using a robotic ankle–foot exoskeleton, Scientific Reports 13, 1363 (2023). Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [PubMed: 36693935] 44. Kim M-K, Yoo K-T, The effects of open and closed kinetic chain exercises on the static and dynamic balance of the ankle joints in young healthy women, Journal of Physical Therapy Science 29, 845–850 (2017). [PubMed: 28603357] 45. WIRED, Stress Testing Real-Life Robot Legs | WIRED (2021). URL: https://www.youtube.com/ watch?v=CKvEBWaPd2I. 46. Zhu H, Nesler C, Divekar N, Peddinti V , Gregg RD, Design principles for compact, backdrivable actuation in partial-assist powered knee orthoses, IEEE/ASME Transactions On Mechatronics 26, 3104–3115 (2021). Publisher: IEEE. [PubMed: 34916771] 47. Laschowski B, McPhee J, Energy-Efficient Actuator Design Principles for Robotic Leg Prostheses and Exoskeletons: A Review of Series Elasticity and Backdrivability, Journal of Computational and Nonlinear Dynamics 18 (2023). 48. Nesler C, Thomas G, Divekar N, Rouse EJ, Gregg RD, Enhancing V oluntary Motion With Modular, Backdrivable, Powered Hip and Knee Orthoses, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7, 6155–6162 (2022). [PubMed: 36051565] 49. Nuesslein C, Bhakta K, Fernandez J, Davenport F, Leestma J, Kim R, Lee D, Mazumdar A, Sawicki G, Young A, Comparing Metabolic Cost and Muscle Activation for Knee and Back Exoskeletons in Lifting, IEEE Transactions on Medical Robotics and Bionics pp. 1–1 (2023). 50. Young AJ, Gannon H, Ferris DP, A Biomechanical Comparison of Proportional Electromyography Control to Biological Torque Control Using a Powered Hip Exoskeleton, Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology 5 (2017). 51. Gasparri GM, Luque J, Lerner ZF, Proportional Joint-Moment Control for Instantaneously Adaptive Ankle Exoskeleton Assistance, IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 27, 751–759 (2019). [PubMed: 30908231] 52. Kang I, Molinaro DD, Choi G, Camargo J, Young AJ, Subject-Independent Continuous Locomotion Mode Classification for Robotic Hip Exoskeleton Applications, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 69, 3234–3242 (2022). [PubMed: 35389859] 53. Medrano RL, Thomas GC, Keais CG, Rouse EJ, Gregg RD, Real-Time Gait Phase and Task Estimation for Controlling a Powered Ankle Exoskeleton on Extremely Uneven Terrain, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39, 2170–2182 (2023). [PubMed: 37304231] 54. Molinaro DD, Kang I, Young AJ, Estimating human joint moments unifies exoskeleton control, reducing user effort, Science Robotics 9, eadi8852 (2024). Publisher: American Association for the Advancement of Science. [PubMed: 38507475] 55. Slade P, Kochenderfer MJ, Delp SL, Collins SH, Personalizing exoskeleton assistance while walking in the real world, Nature 610, 277–282 (2022). Number: 7931 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [PubMed: 36224415] 56. Lin J, Divekar N, Lv G, Gregg RD, Energy Shaping Control with Virtual Spring and Damper for Powered Exoskeletons, 2019 IEEE 58th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) (2019), pp. 3039–3045. ISSN: 2576–2370. 57. Lin J, Divekar NV , Thomas GC, Gregg RD, Optimally Biomimetic Passivity-Based Control of a Lower-Limb Exoskeleton Over the Primary Activities of Daily Life, IEEE Open Journal of Control Systems 1, 15–28 (2022). [PubMed: 35673605] 58. Luger T, Bär M, Seibt R, Rieger MA, Steinhilber B, Using a Back Exoskeleton During Industrial and Functional Tasks—Effects on Muscle Activity, Posture, Performance, Usability, and Wearer Discomfort in a Laboratory Trial, Human Factors 65, 5–21 (2023). Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc. [PubMed: 33861139] Divekar et al. Page 20 Sci Robot. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 18. Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript