communications engineering Article A Nature Portfolio journal https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Powered knee exoskeleton improves sit- to-stand transitions in stroke patients using electromyographic control Check for updates Andrew J. Gunnell1,2,3,S e r g e iV .S a r k i s i a n1,2,3, Heather A. Hayes4,K .B oF o r e m a n1,4, Lukas Gabert1,2,3 & Tommaso Lenzi 1,2,3,5 Millions of stroke survivors are affected by hemiparesis, resulting in dif ﬁculty or inability to move one side of their body. Hemiparesis severely impacts the ability of individuals to perform essential everyday activities, reducing independence and quality of life. Here we show that a powered knee exoskeleton that assists the affected knee joint using proportional electromyographic control signi ﬁcantly improves the ability to stand up from a seated position in eight stroke survivors. With the exoskeleton, stroke survivors stood up signi ﬁcantly faster (8.8% reduction in stand-up time), more symmetrically (13.7% increase in weight-bearing symmetry), and with less effort on their affected side (32% reduction in peak quadriceps muscle activation, 25% reduction in peak biological torque generation). The exoskeleton effectively supplemented the lack of strength in their affected knee, increasing the total knee torque by 59%, which more closely matched their non-affected knee. These results suggest that powered knee exoskeletons are a promising solution for enhancing stand-up ability, improving symmetry, reducing effort, and ultimately enhancing stroke survivors ’ mobility and quality of life. Over 13.7 million strokes occur worldwide each year, with one in four people over the age of 25 having a stroke in their lifetime1. Approximately 80% of stroke survivors experience hemiparesis, resulting in dif ﬁculty or inability to move one side of the body2. Symptoms of hemiparesis include weakened muscles, early onset of fatigue, reduced walking speed, and reduced endurance 3,4. Moreover, hemiparesis severely impacts the ability of individuals to perform everyday activities like standing up from a chair 5. Standing up is essential for functional independence and is conducted by non-disabled individuals 60 times a day on average 6,7.T h u s ,d i fﬁculty standing up after a stroke can substantially reduce mobility, independence, and quality of life8. Standing up from a chair requires greater lower-limb strength than walking9. Many individuals with hemiparesisﬁnd the task especially difﬁcult due to the lack of stability and control of their paretic leg10. Perceived effort and fatigue are much higher in subjects with hemiparesis than in non- disabled individuals 4. The increased effort required to stand up from a chair may also lead to inactivity and further deterioration of mobility. Moreover, this population often uses compensatory sit-to-stand strategies because of the lack of lower-limb strength, including positioning more of their weight over their intact leg and relying excessively on their upper limb 10. As a result, standing up from a chair is not only more difﬁcult for stroke survivors but also more dangerous. Individuals withhemiparesis are more prone to falling than non-disabled individuals11, and 37% of falls among stroke subjects occur during sit-to-stand transitions12. Biomechanics studies show that the reduced ability to control their center of mass13,14, the asymmetrical weight- bearing patterns, and the insufﬁcient peak knee extension torque15 are major factors negatively affecting the ability of hemiparetic individuals to perform sit-to-stand transitionsa n do t h e re v e r y d a yt a s k s 11,14. Therefore, new assis- tive technology interventions are needed to make standing up from a chair easier and safer for individuals with hemiparesis. In healthy individuals, the biological knee joint contributes about 70% of the total work necessary to stand up from a chair 16–19. However, in individuals with stroke, the ability to generate knee torque is severely diminished due to hemiparesis. Consequently, individuals with hemiparesis show major asymmetries in peak knee torque between the affected and unaffected sides when performing sit-to-stand transitions 15,20. In contrast, no substantial peak hip torque asymmetries were observed 15,20.T h e s e observations suggest that a lack of knee strength on the affected paretic side is a major factor in reducing the ability of individuals with hemiparesis to stand up from a chair. Therefore, we hypothesize that assisting the knee joint with a powered knee exoskeleton can improve sit-to-stand transitions in individuals with hemiparesis. 1Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 2Robotics Center at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 3Rocky Mountain Center for Occupational and Environmental Health, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 4Department of Physical Therapy and Athletic Training at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. 5Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA. e-mail: t.lenzi@utah.edu Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 1 1234567890():,; 1234567890():,; Powered exoskeletons are a promising solution to improve mobility in individuals with physical disabilities16,19,21–32, as they can theoretically com- pensate for muscle weakness with their embedded electrical motors and for lack of coordination with their smart controllers. Powered hip and ankle exoskeletons and exosuits have sho wn the ability to improve walking speed 33,34 and reduce walking effort 35. Powered knee exoskeletons have successfully reduced muscle effort for young, healthy, non-paretic indivi- duals climbing stairs and performing sit-to-stand transitions31,36.M o r e o v e r , past studies have proposed using powered exoskeletons to improve reha- bilitation outcomes in the stroke population37,38. However, no studies have investigated using powered knee exoskeletons as an assistive technology to aid sit-to-stand in hemiparetic populations. A powered knee exoskeleton can theoretically compensate for the user’s knee weakness by generating extension torque during sit-to-stand transitions as needed to supplement the biological torque generated by the user’s knee, which is affected by hemiparesis. However, hemiparetic indi- viduals must be able to put more weight onto their impaired side to beneﬁt from the knee extension torque generated by the exoskeleton. Otherwise, the exoskeleton’s assistance will extend the knee but will not help lift the person from the chair. A previous study has shown that hemiparetic individuals cannot put more weight on their impaired side, even when asked to put equal weight on each leg, due to knee weakness in their impaired side 39. Therefore, it is not obvious that the knee exoskeleton ’s assistance can improve sit-to-stand transitions. Moreover, studies with healthy individuals have used electromyography from t he quadriceps to synchronize the assistance provided by the exoskel eton with the movements of the user during sit-to-stand transitions31,36. However, due to the neurological nature of the impairment, hemiparetic individuals may not be able to control their quadriceps activity as needed to drive the exoskeleton assistance. Supported by pilot experiments 40, this study aims to test the hypothesis that if a lightweight powered knee exoskeleto n provides timely assistive torque proportional to the muscle activation of the quadriceps on the affected paretic side, then it will compensatefor the knee weakness on the affected paretic side, as measured by improved peak knee torque symmetry, Moreover, we hypothesize that compensating for the knee weakness on the affected side will improve sit-to-st and transitions by improving weight- bearing symmetry, while reducing muscle effort and stand-up time. Results We recruited eight stroke survivors who experience hemiparesis (ﬁve males and three females; age, 39.1 ± 19.8 years; weight, 79.1 ± 14.8 kg; height, 171 ± 5.7 cm) and three healthy control subjects (two males and one female, 25 ± 4.3 years; weight, 72.3 ± 9.6 kg; height, 176 ± 7.9 cm). Table 1 shows more speciﬁc information on the study participants. Subjects gave informed consent to participate and were photographed (IRB #00120712). We per- formed full-body motion capture with dedicated 6-axis force plates under Table 1 | Participant demographics Subject Age [yrs] Sex Weight [kg] Height [m] Years Post Stroke Impaired Side 5× STS Time [s] 10 M Walk Time [s] Walk Speed [m/s] FAC score S1 63 M 82 1.73 26 R 23.8 11.1 0.54 4 S2 35 M 102 1.68 7 R 11.7 6.55 0.92 4 S3 33 M 73 1.83 8 R 12 4.68 1.28 5 S4 77 M 82 1.70 6 L 9.2 4.52 1.33 4 S5 26 F 64 1.73 4 R 11.89 4.6 1.30 5 S6 29 M 73 1.65 8 R 14 4.8 1.25 4 S7 28 F 97 1.66 5 R 15.25 5.2 1.15 4 S8 22 F 60 1.68 13 R 8.7 5.6 1.07 5 sit-to-stand (STS), functional ambulation categories (FAC). Fig. 1 | Autonomous, unilateral powered knee exoskeleton for assisting knee extension during sit-to-stand transitions. A Components of the knee exoskeleton, including the frame, actuator, and two cuffs tightened around the subject’s thigh and shank. The knee exoskeleton was also attached to the sub- ject by a supportive waistband, visible in ( B), which extended from the thigh cuff to wrap around the user’s waist. B Frontal view of a subject during the experiment. During the Exo condition (pictured), subjects wore the knee exoskeleton on their affected (paretic) limb. During both Exo and No Exo con- ditions, subjects wore re ﬂective markers and elec- tromyography (EMG) sensors on three muscles of the unaffected thigh. Subjects kept their feet equally spaced on separate 6-axis force plates. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 2 each foot to calculate joint kinematics and kinetics via inverse dynamics (Fig. 1). We recorded electromyographic(EMG) signals on three quadricep muscles from each leg (Vastus Lateralis, Vastus Medialis, Rectus Femoris) to assess muscle effort. Participants stood up from a bench without using their arms without (No Exo Trial) and with (Exo Trial) an assistive, unilateral powered knee exoskeleton (Fig. 1). During the Exo Trial,t h ee x o s k e l e t o n assistance was controlled proportionally to signals from an EMG sensor placed on the affected (paretic) Vastus Medialis muscle. This control method provided synchronous assistive torque to the affected knee. Subjects s t o o du pf o rt w os e t so fﬁve repetitions for theNo Exocondition andﬁve sets of ﬁve repetitions for the Exo condition. Healthy control subjects only performed the No Exo condition. The lastﬁve sit-to-stands were taken from each condition for comparison. Themaximum torque for each subject was set to 0.5 Nm/kg, so if the subject weighed 100 kg, we provided up to 50 Nm of knee extension torque with the exoskeleton. The exoskeleton effectively supplemented the lack of strength in the affected knee W ec a l c u l a t e dt h ek n e et o r q u ei nb o t hExo and No Exo conditions for the affected and unaffectedsides using inverse dynamics. Then, we computed the mean peak torque across all stud y participants and conditions and performed statistical analysis (paired t-tests with corrections for multiple comparisons) (Fig.2). Without the exoskeleton, stroke survivors showed a signiﬁcant difference between the peak knee torque of the affected and unaffected side, with the affected side generating 57% less torque than the unaffected side (affected: 0.64 ± 0.04 Nm/kg (mean ± standard error of the mean), unaffected:1.15 ± 0.07 Nm/kg, pairedt-test, p < 0.05). In contrast, with the exoskeleton, there were no signiﬁcant differences between the peak torque on the affected and unaffected side (affected: 1.02 ± 0.07 Nm/kg, unaffected: 1.12 ± 0.04 Nm/kg, Pairedt-test, p = 0.2458). Notably, the peak torque on the affected side signiﬁcantly increased by 59.3% with the exos- keleton (with exoskeleton: 1.02 ± 0.07 Nm/kg, without exoskeleton: 0.64 ± 0.04 Nm/kg pairedt-test,p < 0.05). On the other hand, the peak knee torque on the unaffected side did not change signiﬁcantly with and without the exoskeletons (with exoskeleton: 1.12 ± 0.04 Nm/kg, without exoskele- ton: 1.15 ± 0.07 Nm/kg, p = 0.4928). Focusing on intra-subject compar- isons, without the exoskeleton, all stroke survivors had higher peak knee torque on the unaffected side than on the affected side. With the exoske- leton, there was some variation in whether the affected or unaffected mean peak knee torque was greater. The unaffected side peak knee torque was Fig. 2 | “Total knee torque” during sit-to-stand transitions. Knee joint torques are calculated using inverse dynamics. Positive knee torque is knee extension torque. No Exo condition is on the left, Exo condition is in the middle, and healthy controls (without Exo) are on the right. Gray represents the unaffected side of stroke subjects, red represents the affected side of stroke subjects, blue represents the dominant limb of healthy controls, and yellow represents the non-dominant limb of healthy controls. A Knee torque during sit-to-stand transitions. Lines show the across- subject mean, and shading indicates the across-subject standard error. B Peak knee extension torques during stand-up. The bar height shows the across-subject mean, and the error bars show the across-subject standard error. The colored dots and diamonds show individual subject averages for each condition after ﬁve repetitions. Asterisks indicate signiﬁcant differences between conditions (pairedt-test, p < 0.05). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 3 greater than the affected side for four participants (S3, S4, S6, S7). For three participants (S1, S2, S5), the affected peak knee torque was greater than the unaffected. For one participant (S8), the affected and unaffected peak knee torques were nearly identical. As a reference, the healthy control subjects showed slightly higher mean peak knee torque values on their dominant limb (dominant: 1.06 ± 0.05 Nm/kg, non-dominant: 0.95 ± 0.07 Nm/kg). The exoskeleton signiﬁcantly reduced the muscle and joint effort on the affected knee To assess the user’se f f o r t ,w ec a l c u l a t e dt h eb i o l o g i c a lk n e et o r q u eb ys u b - tracting the exoskeleton’s assistive torque measured by the onboard force/ torque sensor in the powered exoskeleton30 from the total knee torque cal- culated using inverse dynamics41. We then calculated the average peak of the biological torque and the exoskeleton torque across all post-stroke partici- pants and performed the statistical analysis. With the exoskeleton, the affected peak biological knee torque decreased signiﬁcantly by 25% (with exoskeleton: 0.48 ± 0.05 Nm/kg, without exoskeleton: 0.64 ± 0.04 Nm/kg, Pairedt-test: p < 0.05, Fig.2A). In contrast, on the unaffected side, there were no signiﬁcant differences between the peaks of the biological knee torque (with exoskeleton: 1.12 ± 0.04 Nm/kg, without exoskeleton: 1.15 ± 0.07 Nm/kg, p = 0.4928, Fig.2B). The average peak exoskeleton assistive torque applied to the affected side was 0.54 Nm/kg. To assess the user’s effort, we computed the average quadriceps surface EMG muscle signals for vastus mediali s (VM), vastus lateralis (VL), and rectus femoris (RF) across all study participants with and without the exoskeleton on both unaffected and affected sides. EMG values were nor- malized to their respective muscles’ average peak EMG signal during theNo Exo condition. On the affected side, the peaks of the EMG values were signiﬁcantly smaller ( p < 0.05) with the exoskeleton than without the exoskeleton. Speciﬁcally, with the exoskeleton, the VM, VL, and RF muscles’ peak was reduced by 31.6 ± 6.3%, 32.5 ± 5.7%, and 32.4 ± 8.7%, respectively (Fig. 3). On the other hand, on the unaffected side, there were no signiﬁcant differences between the peak EMG values with and without the exoskeleton (VM: +3.1 ± 7.1 %, p = 0.6343, VL: +1.1 ± 4.1 %, p = 0.7879, RF: +4.9 ± 10.9 %, p = 0.6293, Fig.3). We conducted an additional analysis of the hip and ankle torque to quantify the effects of the knee exoskeleton on these unassisted joints. The analysis shows smaller differences between conditions. The peak hip torque on the affected side slightly increased from 0.88 ± 0.07 Nm/kg without the exoskeleton to 0.98 ± 0.05 Nm/kg with the exoskeleton. The unaffected side peak hip torque also slightly increased from 0.69 ± 0.08 Nm/kg without the exoskeleton and 0.74 ± 0.05 Nm/kg with the exoskeleton (Supplementary Material, Fig. S4). In contrast, the peak ankle torque on the unaffected side slightly decreased from 0.37 ± 0.03 Nm/kg without the exoskeleton to 0.31 ± 0.04 Nm/kg with the exoskeleton. Moreover, the peak ankle torque on the affected side slightly decreased from 0.49 ± 0.04 Nm/kg without the exoskeleton to 0.47 ± 0.07 Nm/kg with the exoskeleton (Supplementary Material, Fig. S1). Fig. 3 | Across-subject average muscle effort plots involving exoskeleton assistive torque, biological knee torque, quadricep EMG values during sit-to-stand transitions, and peak EMG values for each side and condition. AThe affected limb (red) muscle effort plots show the exoskeleton assistive torque on the top row, and the biological knee torque across the sit-to-stand transition for both No Exo (dashed) and Exo (solid) conditions on the second row. We subtracted the exoskeleton assistive torque from the total inverse dynamics knee torque in Fig. 2 to calculate biological knee torque. The last three rows show EMG sensor readings from vastus medialis (VM), vastus lateralis (VL), and rectus femoris (RF) for No Exo and Exo conditions. B The unaffected side (gray) muscle effort plots show the biological knee torque in theﬁrst row, followed by the last three rows of VM, VL, and RF EMG values during sit-to-stand. We normalized EMG values to a peak value of one based on the No Exo condition. Bar plots to the right of each time plot indicate the peak values. The lines and bars show across-subject mean, and the shaded regions and error bars in black show across-subject standard error. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 4 The exoskeleton improved reliance on the affected side and reduced sit-to-stand time To assess weight-bearing symmetry, we calculated the degree of asymmetry42 (Supplementary Material, Eq. 1) by subtracting the unaffected side’s ground reaction force (GRF) from the affected side ’sG R Fa n d dividing it by the sum of the two at the point of maximum combined vertical GRF. The point of maximum combined GRF is often used to assess sit-to- stand symmetry 43 because it is a critical phase of chair lift-off. Thus, a value of zero indicates perfect weight-bearing symmetry. A positive value of the degree of asymmetry indicates that the subject ’s affected side bore more weight than the unaffected side. A negative value of the degree of asymmetry indicates that the unaffected side bore more weight. The exoskeleton sig- niﬁcantly improved weight-bearing symmetry (p < 0.05, Fig. 4A). Speciﬁ- cally, stroke survivors’ degree of asymmetry increased from −10.2 ± 2.2% without the exoskeleton to 3.5 ± 2.8% with the exoskeleton, equivalent to a 13.7% shift toward the affected limb with the exoskeleton. As a reference, healthy control subjects’ degree of asymmetry was 3.5 ± 2.0%. Intrasubject analysis shows that six subjects post-stroke (S1, S2, S4, S5, S7, S8) moved their degree of asymmetry from negative to positive, indicating more ground reaction force through their affected side than the unaffected side. Two subjects (S3, S6) showed negati ve values with the exoskeleton but improved their degree of asymmetry, moving it closer to zero. Finally, stroke survivors’ sit-to-stand duration was signiﬁcantly decreased with the exos- keleton from 1.6 ± 0.1 s to 1.4 ± 0.1 s ( p < 0.05). As a reference, the sit- to-stand duration for the healthy control subjects was 1.1 ± 0.1 s (Fig.4B). The exoskeleton increased the margin of stability To better assess the effect of the knee exoskeleton on balance, we analyzed the distances between the extrapolated center of mass (XCOM), center of pressure (COP), and base of support (BOS) (Supplementary Material, Eq. 2). Generally, increasing your margin-of-stability (MoS) or the minimum distance between XCOM and BOS implies better balance because the XCOM is further away from the stability limit represented by the BOS. Moreover, a smaller distance between XCOM and COP during the task execution signiﬁes that the balance is stable while performing the task. Our analysis found that at maximum combined GRF, stroke survivors ’ MoS signiﬁcantly increased from 9.9 ± 0.4 cm without the exoskeleton to 11.2 ± 0.3 cm with the exoskeleton, suggesting users have better balance with the exoskeleton (Supplementary Material, Fig. S5A). We also found that, at maximum combined GRF, stroke survivors ’ distance between XCOM and COP did not change signiﬁcantly from 2.9 ± 0.4 cm without the exoskeleton to 2.8 ± 0.6 cm with the e xoskeleton, suggesting users have similar dynamic balance with and without the exoskeleton (Supplementary Material, Fig. S5B). Discussion Hemiparesis is very common after stroke and severely impacts the ability to perform essential everyday activities, such as standing up from a chair, resulting in substantial negative effects on mobility and quality of life. This study shows that assisting the affected knee signi ﬁcantly improves sit- to-stand transitions in stroke survivors. With the knee exoskeleton, stroke survivors’ mean total knee torque on the affected side increased signiﬁcantly by ~57%, achieving similar values to those on the unaffected side, showing that the knee exoskeleton can fully compensate for the knee weakness on the affected side. The affected side mean biological torque and quadriceps muscle activation decreased signiﬁcantly by 25% and 32%, respectively, demonstrating that the knee exoskeleton can signiﬁcantly decrease effort. The degree of asymmetry mean value shifted toward the affected side by ~14%, matching, on average, the weight-bearing symmetry measured in healthy control subjects, which shows that the exoskeleton has the potential to improve balance. Finally, the average stand-up duration signi ﬁcantly decreased by ~9% with the exoskeleton, although it was still slower than for healthy controls. Cumulatively, theseresults support our hypothesis that a powered knee exoskeleton can improve sit-to-stand transfers in hemiparetic subjects by providing assistive torque proportional to the muscle contrac- tions on the affected side quadriceps.However, we should carefully analyze several critical factors to ensure the outcomes of this study are effectively translated into a clinical solution. In agreement with previous studies 19,31, we found that standing up without the exoskeleton was highly asymmetric, with the peak knee torque Fig. 4 | Degree of Asymmetry at the maximum combined ground reaction force point during sit-to-stand transitions and the duration to stand up. A A positive value indicates GRF asymmetry toward the affected side, and a negative value suggests GRF asymmetry toward the unaffected side. The average DOA across all subjects is shown in black with standard error bars. B The sit-to-stand duration was determined by the initial velocity of the subject ’s center of mass and ended when their total body weight equaled the combined GRF. For each plot, the No Exo condition is shown on the left, the Exo condition in the middle, and healthy controls on the right. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 5 on the affected side achieving only half of that observed on the unaffected side. The exoskeleton seemed to address this problem. With the exoskeleton, the total torque on the affected side increased substantially, closely matching t h ep e a kk n e et o r q u eo nt h es o u n ds i d e .H o w e v e r ,t h e r ew e r ev i s i b l ed i f - ferences between the knee torque pro ﬁles of the affected and unaffected sides. After the peak torque, the total knee torque on the affected side was visibly lower than on the unaffected si de, suggesting that the exoskeleton assistance decreased too quickly to fully support the stand-up movement. Analysis of the knee kinematics shows that, with the exoskeleton, the affected knee extended more rapidl y than the unaffected knee (Supple- mentary Material, Fig. S1), partly explaining the quicker drop of the total knee torque on the affected side. It is also possible that the proposed exos- keleton controller caused the observed drop in total knee torque. With the proposed controller, the exoskeletonextension torque was proportional to the EMG of the Vastus Medialis, and theproportional gain decreased as the knee extended. Thus, it is possible that the exoskeleton torque was reduced too rapidly as the knee extended. This analysis shows that providing extension torque with a knee exoskeleton effectively decreases asymmetries in peak knee torque, but the propose d controller dropped the extension assistance too quickly, resulting in suboptimal assistance. By integrating the knee torque over the knee joint position, we can calculate the mechanical work done by the knee during the sit-to-stand movement. This joint work analysis (Supplementary Material, Fig. S7) shows that stroke survivors’ unaffected knees generate signiﬁcantly more positive mechanical work than the affected side, both with and without the exoskeleton. This analysis also shows that during the exoskeleton condition, stroke survivors’ total mechanical work done by the affected knee (biological + exoskeleton) was signiﬁcantly higher than the total work performed by the affected knee without the exoskeleton. Thus, this joint work analysis shows that wearing the exoskeleton increases the total mechanical work done by the affected knee, even though it is less than the work done by the unaffected knee (Supplementary Material, Fig. S7). In this study, we decided to assist only the affected knee joint. We made this decision based on the observations that, in healthy subjects, the knee joint contributes most of the work necessary to stand up from a chair 16–19.I n stroke survivors, the affected knee joint shows the largest de ﬁcit in joint torque generation during sit-to-stand transitions. Previous exoskeleton studies showed that assistance providedat one joint affects the other joints24. This study shows that assisting the affected knee joint with a powered exoskeleton does not signi ﬁcantly impact the other lower-limb joints (Supplementary Material, Figs. S8–9), including knee torque generation on the unaffected knee. However, there is some promise to reduce ankle torque on the affected side, which should be investigated in future studies. The exoskeleton assistance enabled hemiparetic subjects to put more weight on the affected side, as shown by the signiﬁcant increase in the degree of asymmetry. Because total knee torque on the affected side increased while the muscle effort decreased signiﬁcantly, we can conclude that the observed shift in weight-bearing symmetry was not due simply to the subject attempting to put more weight onto the affected side but instead to the knee exoskeleton effectively supplementing the biological knee torque on the affected side. Previous studies have shown that hemiparetic stroke survivors’ knee extensor strength is linked to their weight-bearing asymmetry 39.O u r study showed signiﬁcant improvement in weight-bearing symmetry after less than two hours of familiarization with the exoskeleton. This result shows that stroke subjects trusted the exoskeleton to assist them despite the short training, suggesting the proposed intervention is intuitive and requires minimal training. The observed improvements in the degree of asymmetry suggest that the exoskeleton may improve balanc e. This result is supported by the analysis of the extrapolated center of mass and base of support. Although there is no accepted standard in the ﬁeld to assess balance during sit- to-stand transitions, the extrapolated center of mass has been previously used to examine balance during dynamic tasks like sit-to-stand transfers 44. Our results show that, with the exoskeleton, the distance between these two measures, also known as the margin of stability, increases. This result is generally interpreted as an increase in balance because the extrapolated center of mass is further away from leaving the base of support. Although accurately measuring balance is difﬁcult and several open questions con- cerning the validity and sensitivity of different balance measures still exist 45, we suggest that balance improves with the exoskeleton. The average degree of asymmetry increased from−10.2% without the exoskeleton (bias toward the unaffected side) to 3.52% with the exoskeleton (bias toward the affected side). Moreover, the average degree of asymmetry in hemiparetic subjects using the exoskeleton matched the average degree of asymmetry in our healthy controls. Thisresult suggests that the exoskeleton signiﬁcantly improves weight-bearing symmetry. However, further analysis reveals interesting differences between subjects. Although the degree of asymmetry increased for all hemiparetic subjects (more weight on the affected side), this increase resulted in better overall weight-bearing sym- metry only for four subjects. For the other four, the weight-bearing sym- metry became skewed towards the affected side. This result could indicate overreliance on exoskeleton assistance, which may have negative long-term effects. We believe it is possible to avo id this issue by personalizing exos- keleton assistance to each person’ss p e c iﬁc needs instead of using a ﬁxed value (i.e., 0.5 Nm/kg), as we did in this study. Personalization of the exoskeleton assistance has been proven successful in optimizing the out- comes with powered exoskeletons in walking, and it could be achieved using manual tuning 29 or an automated process often referred to as human-in-the- loop optimization46. Future studies should apply this optimization process to sit-to-stand transitions with pow ered exoskeletons and verify that it prevents overreliance on the exoskeleton. The exoskeleton assistance enabled hemiparetic subjects to sig- niﬁcantly reduce their quadriceps muscle activations on the affected side, suggesting powered knee exoskeletons have the potential to mitigate the early onset of fatigue commonly observed in the stroke population 47.S t r o k e survivors show reduced peak torque at their maximum voluntary contraction 48, which means they need higher muscle activation on their affected side than their unaffected side to generate the same joint torque. Moreover, they show lower fatigue resistance on their affected side49,w h i c h means muscles on their affected side fatigue sooner than those on the unaffected side when matching the intensity and repetition of muscle contractions between the two sides. In this study, we did not assess fatigue directly. However, we showed both reduced biological knee torque and quadriceps muscle activations on the paretic side. These reductions indicate that the powered exoskeleton has the potential to mitigate fatigue, which would enable stroke survivors to stay more active for a longer time. It is worth noting that, in this study, we did not use maximum voluntary con- traction to normalize EMG values. Due tothis limitation, it was not possible to quantify the observed reduction inmuscle activation in absolute terms, which is necessary to quantify the potential reduction in fatigue. Moreover, it was not possible to compare EMG activations between the unaffected and affected sides. Thus, while the stroke survivors decreased their muscle effort on the affected side, we do not know how their effort compares to the maximum voluntary contraction and whether the observed reduction could have a clinically meaningful effect on fatigue. The analysis of sit-to-stand timing shows that stroke subjects com- pleted the movement signiﬁcantly faster with the knee exoskeleton, as the stand-up time decreased by ~9% with the exoskeleton. As a result of the faster sit-to-stand transition and theincreased total knee torque, the knee power on the affected side increased substantially (+100%, Supplementary M a t e r i a l ,F i g .S 2 ) .N o t a b l y ,w h e nw e a r i n gt h ee x o s k e l e t o n ,t h ep e a kk n e e power was nearly identical between the affected and unaffected sides. Thus, the knee exoskeleton enabled stroke subjects to stand up faster, although it was still slower than our healthy control subjects. Participants commented that standing up from the bench felt considerably harder after removing the knee exoskeleton. Although this feed back is encouraging, future studies should perform rigorous subjective assessments of perceived effort, which may require more participants due to the higher variability of subjective effort scales. Subjective feedback could also personalize the assistance of the exoskeleton, as successfully done for walking assistance 50. A standard survey https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 6 should quantify subjective preference and assess usability in real life. A potential limitation in our study is that each subject completed the Exo condition after the No Exo condition. We completed the protocol in this order to lessen the complexity of the study involving multiple camera calibrations and only donning the exoskeleton once. Future studies should randomize the order of conditions to address this limitation. This study shows that a powered knee exoskeleton can improve sit-to- stand transitions in stroke survivors affected by hemiparesis by reducing joint and muscle effort on the affected side while increasing the weight- bearing symmetry. Future clinical studies should assess the efﬁcacy of the proposed intervention on a broader population of individuals with hemi- paresis, including stroke survivors with lower functional ambulation cate- gories (FAC) scores 51.S p e c iﬁcally, studies should test if it is possible for a stroke survivor who relies on handrails or other aids when standing up from a chair to stand up without using them. Additionally, future studies should include a healthy control group that matches the demographics of the tested individuals post-stroke. A limitationof our study is that our healthy control group is younger than our cohort of stroke survivors, which reduces the reliability of comparisons between the two groups. Standard surveys, like the System Usability Scale, should be used to quantify subjective preference and assess usability in real life. It would also be interesting to study the effect on other common activities of daily living, including ambulation and func- tional mobility. We expect this knowle dge to enable further device opti- mization, which will be critical for the clinical success of the proposed intervention. Methods Study protocol Overview of the experimental protocol. This study aimed to assess the effectiveness of a powered knee exoskeleton during sit-to-stand transi- tions in eight stroke survivors. To this end, we measured kinematic, kinetic, and EMG activity in a motion capture lab while study partici- pants performed sit-to-stand transitions. Our primary outcomes were knee extension torque, ground reaction force symmetry, and EMG from the Vastus Medialis, Vastus Lateralis, and Rectus Femoris from both affected and unaffected sides. The Institutional Review Board at the University of Utah approved the study protocol (IRB# 00120712), and each subject provided informed consent to participate and for the pub- lication of their photos and videos. Practice session . Before data collection, participants post-stroke attended a 2-h practice session to learn the experimental protocol and practice standing up with the powered exoskeleton. At the beginning of the practice session, the subjects performed ﬁve sit-to-stands as fast as possible without using handrails and a 10-m walk test to determine their baseline functional mobility. Next, subjects practiced the study protocol by performing sit-to-stand transitions, ﬁrst without the exoskeleton (No Exo condition) and then with the exoskeleton (Exo condition). We asked all participants to hold their hands together for both test conditions to prevent them from pushing off the bench. Subjects stood up from a bench with no hand and backrests and a standard height of 46 cm for all tested conditions (Fig. 1B). Individuals with hemiparesis tend to stand up with asymmetric foot placement, with the unaffected foot closer to the chair than the affected foot. This asymmetric foot placement enables them to put more weight on their unaffected side, which is needed to compensate for their loss of strength and control on the affected side 15. However, this asymmetric foot placement inevitably results in asymmetric knee torque values. Previous studies have changed foot placement in stroke subjects while standing up and found that knee joint torque and weight-bearing symmetry did not differ between spontaneous and symmetric foot placement 52,53. Therefore, for the goal of this study, we decided to control foot placement by having their feet placed in a symmetric stance, shoulder-width apart, for both No Exo and Exo conditions. To facilitate consistent and symmetric foot placement, we taped the subject ’s foot outline to the ﬂoor (Fig. 1B) in a comfortable position determined at the beginning of each session. Main experimental session . Subjects performed the data recording session one to two weeks after the practice session. Data recording took place in a motion capture lab with a 12-camera Vicon system (Vicon Motion Systems Ltd.; Oxford, UK) and two AMTI ﬂoor force plates (Advanced Mechanical Technology, Inc.; Watertown, MA). The subject wore tight- ﬁtting clothes with re ﬂective markers on anatomical land- marks (Fig. 1B) and a safety harness connected to overhead support to prevent falls. We used a modi ﬁed Plug-in-Gait model 54 with redundant markers placed on the subject ’s pelvis, legs, and feet for more reliable segment tracking. In addition, we measured muscle activations using two four-channel EMG sensors (Delsys Trigno Quattro, Research + System, Delsys Incorporated; Natick, MA). We placed EMG electrodes on the affected and unaffected Vastus Medialis, Vastus Lateralis, and Rectus Femoris, following SENIAM guidelines 55. The subjects wore an addi- tional surface EMG electrode (Ottobock) placed on the Vastus Medialis of the affected leg to control the knee exoskeleton. Sampling frequencies of marker trajectories and force plates were set to 200 Hz and 2000 Hz, respectively. When used, the knee exoskeleton recorded the assistive torque through its internal force/torque sensor at 500 Hz. Synchroniza- tion between the motion capture system and the knee exoskeleton was achieved using a digital line. Before data collection started, we performed a static calibration for the subject-speciﬁc motion capture model and a functional knee joint cali- bration to locate the centers of rotation for the knee joints using the symmetric center of rotation estimation (SCoRE) and symmetrical axis of rotation analysis (SARA) 56,57. After the calibration, the subjects per- formed sit-to-stand transitions using the same bench as in the practice session. Instructions were the same during both the No Exo and Exo conditions. We instructed the subjects to keep their feet at shoulder width and hold their hands together for each sit-to-stand transition. We also asked the subjects to stand up at their self-selected pace and pause for three seconds between sitting and standing (Supplementary Video 1). To create a fair comparison between conditions, each subject was informed to stand up symmetrically in the No Exo and Exo condi- tions. Each subject ﬁrst performed the No Exo condition in two sets of ﬁve sit-to-stand transitions. Following a 30-min rest period, the subject donned the powered knee exoskeleton and repeated static and functional calibrations. During the Exo condition, post-stroke subjects repeated sit- to-stand trials in ﬁve sets of ﬁve repetitions, allowing the participant to re-acclimatize to the exoskeleton assistance. Between each set, subjects were given rest periods to minimize fatigue. The ﬁnal ﬁve sit-to-stands from No Exo and Exo conditions were used for data analysis. Healthy control subjects only performed the No Exo condition. Utah knee exoskeleton and proportional EMG controller For this study, we used the Utah knee exoskeleton, previously validated with healthy subjects30 and used on one stroke survivor40 (Fig. 1(A)). The Utah knee exoskeleton uses a high-power series-elastic actuator in combination with a four-bar linkage. The exoske leton frame connects to the wearer ’s thigh through a plastic cuff, the inner surface of which is lined with Velcro. The subject can wear a strap around t heir waist and thigh for additional support. The thigh shell is tightened using BOA ® straps with magnetic buckles, and the shank segment uses a suspended wrap in a C-shaped frame. The Utah Knee Exoskeleton weighs 2.5 kg without the electronics pack and features a lightweight, compact, self-aligning mechanism with three passive degrees of freedom. The self-aligning mechanism has previously improved subject comfort and task performance during sit-to-stand transitions 17. The weight of the electronics pack, inc luding the battery and protective covers, is 1.1 kg. The Utah Knee Exoskeleton uses an onboard computer (myRIO-1900, National Instruments, USA) with sensor readings and ﬁl- tering run at 500 Hz, while the low-level control loop runs at 1 kHz. The onboard computer communicates with the motor’s current servo controller https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 7 (ESCON 70/10, Maxon Motor, Switzerland) while another laptop runs a custom graphical user interface (GUI ) for parameter-selection purposes, data monitoring, and communicates via Wi-Fi with the onboard computer. The GUI starts/stops saving data and changes the control parameters. For this study, we implemented a proportional EMG controller with a variable gain40,58. Proportional EMG control has been successfully used in upper-32 and lower-limb 58 exoskeletons and prostheses. Our assistive controller uses the EMG signal from the affected side Vastus Medialis to deﬁne the desired extension knee torque during sit-to-stand transitions (Supplementary Material, Fig. S3). Speci ﬁcally, when the subject stands up, the Vastus Medialis EMG signal is multiplied by a gain ðG ¼ G maxÞ to deﬁne the desired knee extension torque. The desired torque saturates at the maximum value ( Tmax), which was set to 0.5 Nm/kg based on the subject’s weight. Moreover, after the knee joint angle exceeds a set threshold ðθstanding Þ, the proportional gain ðGÞ ramps to zero to prevent knee hyperextension. Through a GUI, the experimenter adjusts the controller parameters ( Tmax; Gmax; θstanding , _θsitdown ) and the controller automatically switches to a transparent mode (i.e., zero-torque mode) when the subject performs a stand-to-sit transition and the knee velocity exceeds a speci ﬁed knee velocity threshold ð δ δt ^θjoint < _θsitdown Þ.T h e assistive controller uses a closed-loop PID regulator at the low level to accurately track the desired knee torque de ﬁned by the high-level con- troller (T des joint ). First, the desired knee torque is converted into the desired motor torque ( Tdes motor ) using the four-bar transmission ratio, ballscrew, and belt transmission ratio. Finally, the desired motor torque is fed to the PID controller and the motor driver. Statistical analysis A two-way ANOVA was conducted to compare the results on knee torque between the No Exo and Exo conditions and between the unaf- fected and affected sides. After determining at least one variable sig- niﬁcantly different from the others, the Tukey t-test was performed with a paired-sample t-test between each condition and unaffected and affected sides at a conservative alpha level of 0.0025 based on four comparisons. Paired t-tests were also conducted to compare the No Exo and Exo conditions for EMG peak values with a conservative alpha level of 0.005 due to the comparison across conditions and degree of asym- metry. The signi ﬁcance level is reported when exceeding the standard p values of signi ﬁcance (p < 0.05). Data availability All data is freely available upon request to the corresponding author. Code availability All code is freely available upon request to the corresponding author. Received: 18 November 2024; Accepted: 23 May 2025; References 1. Patrice et al. Contributions: Corresponding Authors: Introduction . 2. Hoffman, H. Treating Hemiplegia and Hemiparesis After Stroke . https://www.saebo.com/blog/treating-hemiplegia-hemiparesis- stroke/#:~:text=Hemiparesis%20occurs%20when%20one%20side %20of%20the%20body,can%20lead%20to%20increased% 20difﬁculty%20performing%20everyday%20activities (2022). 3. Jonkers, I., Delp, S. & Patten, C. Capacity to increase walking speed is limited by impaired hip and ankle power generation in lower functioning persons post-stroke. Gait Posture https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.gaitpost.2008.07.010 (2009). 4. Rybar, M. M. et al. The stroke-related effects of hip ﬂexion fatigue on over ground walking. Gait Posture 39, 1103–1108 (2014). 5. Mozaffarian, D. et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics —2016 Update. Circulation 133, e38–e360 (2016). 6. Dall, P. M. & Kerr, A. Frequency of the sit to stand task: an observational study of free-living adults.Appl. Ergon. 41,5 8–61 (2010). 7. Kerr, K., White, J., Barr, D. & Mollan, R. Standardization and de ﬁnitions of the sit-stand-sit movement cycle. Gait Posture 2, 182–190 (1994). 8. Hankey, G. J. Long-term outcome after ischaemic stroke/transient ischaemic attack. Cerebrovasc. Dis. https://doi.org/10.1159/ 000069936 (2003). 9. Hughes, M. A., Myers, B. S. & Schenkman, M. L. The role of strength in rising from a chair in the functionally impaired elderly. J. Biomech. 29, 1509–1513 (1996). 10. Takahashi, J. Relationship between the ability to stand and physical function in stroke survivors with hemiplegia: a pilot study. Jpn. J. Compr. Rehabil. Sci. 12,4 –8 (2021). 11. Cheng, P. T., Wu, S. H., Liaw, M. Y., Wong, A. M. K. & Tang, F. T. Symmetrical body-weight distribution training in stroke patients and its effect on fall prevention. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 82, 1650–1654 (2001). 12. Nyberg, L. & Gustafson, Y. Patient falls in stroke rehabilitation: a challenge to rehabilitation strategies. Stroke A J. Cereb. Circ. 26, 838–842 (1995). 13. Lee, M. Y., Wong, M. K., Tang, F. T., Cheng, P. T. & Lin, P. S. Comparison of balance responses and motor patterns during sit-to- stand task with functional mobility in stroke patients 1. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil. Issue 76, 401–410 (1997). 14. Cheng, P. T. et al. The sit-to-stand movement in stroke patients and its correlation with falling.Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil.79, 1043–1046 (1998). 15. Roy, G. et al. The effect of foot position and chair height on the asymmetry of vertical forces during sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit tasks in individuals with hemiparesis.Clin. Biomech.21, 585–593 (2006). 16. Shepherd, M. K. & Rouse, E. J. Design and validation of a torque- controllable knee exoskeleton for sit-to-stand assistance. IEEE/ ASME Trans. Mechatron. 22, 1695–1704 (2017). 17. Sarkisian, S. V., Ishmael, M. K. & Lenzi, T. Self-aligning mechanism improves comfort and performance with a powered knee exoskeleton. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 29,6 2 9–640 (2021). 18. Wretenberg, P. & Arborelius, U. P. Power and work produced in different leg muscle groups when rising from a chair. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 68, 413–417 (1994). 19. Young, A. J., Gannon, H. & Ferris, D. P. A Biomechanical comparison of proportional electromyography control to biological torque control using a powered hip exoskeleton. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 5,1 –17 (2017). 20. Lomaglio, M. J. & Eng, J. J. Muscle strength and weight-bearing symmetry relate to sit-to-stand performance in individuals with stroke. Gait Posture 22, 126–131 (2005). 21. Nesler, C., Thomas, G., Divekar, N., Rouse, E. J. & Gregg, R. D. Enhancing voluntary motion with modular, backdrivable, powered hip and knee orthoses. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 7, 6155–6162 (2022). 2 2 . F e r r i s ,D .P .&L e w i s ,C .L .R o b o t i cl o w e rl i m be x o s k e l e t o n su s i n g proportional myoelectric control. in2009 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society 2119–2124 https://doi.org/10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5333984(IEEE, 2009). 23. Franks, P. W. et al. The effects of incline level on optimized lower-limb exoskeleton assistance: a case series. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 30, 2494–2505 (2022). 24. Sawicki, G. S. & Ferris, D. P. Mechanics and energetics of level walking with powered ankle exoskeletons. J. Exp. Biol. 211, 1402–1413 (2008). 25. Zhang, T., Tran, M. & Huang, H. Design and experimental veri ﬁcation of hip exoskeleton with balance capacities for walking assistance. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 23, 274–285 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 8 26. Contreras-Vidal, J. L. et al. Powered exoskeletons for bipedal locomotion after spinal cord injury. J. Neural Eng. 13, 031001 (2016). 27. Murray, S. A., Ha, K. H., Hartigan, C. & Goldfarb, M. An assistive control approach for a lower-limb exoskeleton to facilitate recovery of walking following stroke. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 23, 441–449 (2015). 28. Takahashi, K. Z., Lewek, M. D. & Sawicki, G. S. A neuromechanics- based powered ankle exoskeleton to assist walking post-stroke: a feasibility study. J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 12,1 –13 (2015). 29. Ishmael, M. K., Archangeli, D. & Lenzi, T. Powered hip exoskeleton improves walking economy in individuals with above-knee amputation. Nat. Med. 27, 1783–1788 (2021). 30. Sarkisian, S. V., Ishmael, M. K., Hunt, G. R. & Lenzi, T. Design, development, and validation of a self-aligning mechanism for high- torque powered knee exoskeletons. IEEE Trans. Med. Robot. Bionics 2, 248–259 (2020). 31. Zhu, H., Nesler, C., Divekar, N., Peddinti, V. & Gregg, R. D. Design principles for compact, backdrivable actuation in partial-assist powered knee orthoses. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 26, 3104–3115 (2021). 32. Lenzi, T., De Rossi, S. M. M., Vitiello, N. & Carrozza, M. C. Intention- based EMG control for powered exoskeletons. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59, 2180–2190 (2012). 33. Awad, L. N., Kudzia, P., Revi, D. A., Ellis, T. D. & Walsh, C. J. Walking faster and farther with a soft robotic exosuit: Implications for post- stroke gait assistance and rehabilitation.IEEE Open J. Eng. Med. Biol. 1, 108–115 (2020). 34. Pan, Y. T. et al. Effects of bilateral assistance for hemiparetic gait post- stroke using a powered hip exoskeleton. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 51, 410–421 (2023). 35. Awad, L. N. et al. A Soft Robotic Exosuit Improves Walking in Patients after Stroke. https://www.science.org (2017). 36. Sarkisian, S. V., Gabert, L. & Lenzi, T. Series-elastic actuator with two degree-of-freedom PID control improves torque control in a powered knee exoskeleton. Wearable Technol. 4,1 –14 (2023). 37. Kasai, R. & Takeda, S. The Effect of a Hybrid Assistive Limb® on Sit-to- Stand and Standing Patterns of Stroke Patients . 38. Li, Y. A. et al. Exoskeleton-assisted sit-to-stand training improves lower-limb function through modi ﬁcations of muscle synergies in subacute stroke survivors. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2023.3297737 (2023). 39. Brière, A., Lauzière, S., Gravel, D. & Nadeau, S. Perception of weight- bearing distribution during sit-to-stand tasks in hemiparetic and healthy individuals. Stroke 41, 1704–1708 (2010). 40. Sarkisian, S. V., Gunnell, A. J., Bo Foreman, K. & Lenzi, T. Knee exoskeleton reduces muscle effort and improves balance during sit- to-stand transitions after stroke: a case study. in IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics. Vol 2022-July (IEEE Computer Society, 2022). 41. Ishmael, M. K. et al. Powered hip exoskeleton reduces residual hip effort without affecting kinematics and balance in individuals with above-knee amputations during walking. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 70, 1162–1171 (2023). 42. Hunt, G. R., Hood, S., Gabert, L. & Lenzi, T. Can a powered knee-ankle prosthesis improve weight-bearing symmetry during stand-to-sit transitions in individuals with above-knee amputations? J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. 20,1 –16 (2023). 43. Hunt, G. R., Hood, S., Gabert, L. & Lenzi, T. Effect of increasing assistance from a powered prosthesis on weight-bearing symmetry, effort, and speed during stand-up in individuals with above-knee amputation. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 31,1 1–21 (2023). 44. Hof, A. L., Gazendam, M. G. J. & Sinke, W. E. The condition for dynamic stability. J. Biomech. 38,1 –8 (2005). 45. Raymakers, J. A., Samson, M. M. & Verhaar, H. J. J. The assessment of body sway and the choice of the stability parameter(s).Gait Posture 21,4 8–58 (2005). 46. Zhang, J. et al. Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance during walking. Science (1979) 356, 1280–1284 (2017). 47. Egerton, T., Hokstad, A., Askim, T., Bernhardt, J. & Indredavik, B. Prevalence of fatigue in patients 3 months after stroke and association with early motor activity: A prospective study comparing stroke patients with a matched general population cohort.BMC Neurol. 15,1 (2015). 48. Knorr, S., Ivanova, T. D., Doherty, T. J., Campbell, J. A. & Garland, S. J. The origins of neuromuscular fatigue post-stroke.Exp. Brain Res.214, 303–315 (2011). 49. Gerrits, K. H. et al. Isometric muscle function of knee extensors and the relation with functional performance in patients with stroke. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 90, 480–487 (2009). 50. Ingraham, K. A., Remy, C. D. & Rouse, E. J. The role of user preference in the customized control of robotic exoskeletons.Sci. Robot. 7,1 –12 (2022). 51. Hayashi, Y. et al. The development of Ambulation Independence Measure: A new measurement tool to assess gait ability in acute stroke patients. NeuroRehabilitation 50, 409–416 (2022). 52. Camargos, A. C. R., Rodrigues-de-Paula-Goulart, F. & Teixeira- Salmela, L. F. The effects of foot position on the performance of the sit-to-stand movement with chronic stroke subjects.Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 90, 314–319 (2009). 53. Roy, G. et al. Side difference in the hip and knee joint moments during sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit tasks in individuals with hemiparesis. Clin. Biomech. 22, 795–804 (2007). 54. Hood, S., Ishmael, M. K., Gunnell, A., Foreman, K. B. & Lenzi, T. A kinematic and kinetic dataset of 18 above-knee amputees walking at various speeds. Sci. Data 7,1 –8 (2020). 55. Hermens, H. J. http://seniam.org/sensor_location.htm. http://seniam. org/sensor_location.htm. 56. Ehrig, R. M., Taylor, W. R., Duda, G. N. & Heller, M. O. A survey of formal methods for determining the centre of rotation of ball joints. J. Biomech. 39, 2798–2809 (2006). 57. Taylor, W. R. et al. Repeatability and reproducibility of OSSCA, a functional approach for assessing the kinematics of the lower limb. Gait Posture 32, 231–236 (2010). 58. Kinnaird, C. R. & Ferris, D. P. Medial gastrocnemius myoelectric control of a robotic ankle exoskeleton. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 17,3 1–37 (2009). Acknowledgements We acknowledge the contribution of all study participants. We would like to thank D. Archangeli, B. Ortolano, K. Pruyn, and G. Hunt for their assistance with subject testing and S. Edgley for his help with participant recruitment. We also thank our funding sources, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health grant (5T42OH008414) and National Science Foundation grant (2046287). Author contributions T.L. directed the project and acquired the funding. A.J.G., S.V.S., L.G., and T.L. conceptualized and implemented the methodology of the study. H.H. recruited the participants for the study. A.J.G. and S.V.S. conducted the experiments with human participants. A.J.G. analyzed the data. A.J.G., S.V.S., B.F., L.G., and T.L. visualized and reviewed the data. B.F. and T.L. supervised the experiments and the project. All authors contributed to the paper preparation. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 9 Additional information Supplementary informationThe online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 . Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to Tommaso Lenzi. Peer review information Communications Engineeringthanks the anonymous reviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: [Rosamund Daw]. Reprints and permissions informationis available at http://www.nature.com/reprints Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modi ﬁed the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc-nd/4.0/ . © The Author(s) 2025 https://doi.org/10.1038/s44172-025-00440-3 Article Communications Engineering | (2025) 4:104 10