1786 IEEE TRAN SACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 30, 2022 Reducing Squat Physical Effort Using Personalized Assistance From an Ankle Exoskeleton Prakyath Kantharaju , Member, IEEE, Hyeongkeun Jeong , Sruthi Ramadurai , Michael Jacobson , Heejin Jeong , Member, IEEE, and Myunghee Kim , Member, IEEE Abstract — Exoskeletons can assist humans during squatting and the assistance has the potential to reduce the physical demands. Although several squat assistance methods are available, the effect of personalized assistance on physical effort has not been examined. We hypothesize that personalized assistance will reduce the physical effort of squatting. We developed a human-in-the-loop Bayesian optimization scheme to minimize the metabolic cost of squatting using a unilateral ankle exoskeleton. The opti- mization identiﬁed subject-speciﬁc assistance parameters for ascending and descending during squatting and took 15.8 min on average to converge. The subject-speciﬁc optimized condition reduced metabolic cost by 19.9% and rectus femoris muscle activity by 28.7% compared to the condition without the exoskeleton with a higher probability of improvement compared to a generic condition. In an additional study with two participants, the personalized condition presented higher metabolic cost reduction than the generic condition. These reductions illustrate the impor- tance of personalized ankle assistance using an exoskele- ton for squatting, a physicallyintensive activity, and suggest that such a method can be applied to minimize the physical effort of squatting. Future work can investigate the effect of personalized squat assistance on fatigue and the potential risk of injury. Index Terms — Squatting, human-in-the-loop, ankle-foot orthosis, and exoskeleton. I. I NTRODUCTION S QUATTING is a physically intensive and injury-prone task. Joint loading during squatting is higher than it is in other daily activities, such as walking [1], [2] and standing. Joint loads in squatting have increased contact stress and injuries in the tibiofemoral and patellofemoral joints [3]–[5]. Manuscript received 11 November 2021; revised 7 May 2022; accepted 22 June 2022. Date of publication 27 June 2022; date of current version 5 July 2022. The work of Michael Jacobson was supported by the Veterans Affairs Chapter 31 Grant. This work was supported in part by the Korea Institute of Robotics and T echnology Convergence (KIRO), in part by LIG Nex1, and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant SES-2024863. (Corresponding author: Myunghee Kim.) This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental proc edures and protocols was granted by the UIC IRB under Application No. 2020-053. Prakyath Kantharaju, Hyeongkeun Jeong, Sruthi Ramadurai, Michael Jacobson, and Myunghee Kim are with the Mechanical and Indus- trial Engineering Department, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA (e-mail: myheekim@uic.edu). Heejin Jeong was with the Mechanical and Industrial Engineering Department, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA. He is now with Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering, Arizona State University , T empe, AZ 85281 USA. Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSRE.2022.3186692 An incorrect posture could cause this [6]. One of the reasons for the posture is fatigue [7], [8], which is partially caused by increased physical effort [9], [10], typically measured by metabolic cost [11]. Squat assistance from an exoskeleton has the potential to reduce squat effort, and perhaps reduce fatigue, maintain correct posture, and reduce related injuries. Exoskeletons have been used to assist lower limb activities. A lower limb exoskeleton was shown to reduce metabolic cost and muscle activity level during walking [12]–[17]. These positive effects have also been shown for squat assistance [17]–[20]. When the squat activity was assisted using an active full lower-body exoskeleton for the hip, knee, and ankle joints [21], this system with reinforcement learning-based control reduced the squat effort needed to maintain balance [22]. To make such squat assistance available for everyday use in occupational or rehabilitation setting, researchers have developed singl e joint assistance exoskele- tons that provided either hip [23], [24], or knee [25]–[28] assistance. Such assistance resulted in reduced muscle activ- ity [23]–[28] and reduced metabolic cost of squatting [26], [28]. Furthermore, previous research on kinematics and biome- chanical simulation suggested that a single-joint exoskeleton for the ankle can assist the squat activity [4], [29]–[33]. Ankle exoskeletons have been used to assist healthy indi- viduals [13], [34]–[36] and persons with stroke [37]–[40]. Prior studies using theory [41]–[43] and computational simu- lation [44]–[46] revealed the importance of the ankle for walk- ing. Such research has motivated the development of assistance methods using ankle exoskeletons, which have subsequently been used to reduce the metabolic cost of walking [13], [14], [34], [47], [48]. Similarly, theoretical [4], [32], [33] and computational studies [29]–[31] studies also identiﬁed the importance of the ankle during squatting and suggests that an ankle exoskeleton may be able to reduce the squat effort. Realizing effective squat assistance using an ankle exoskeleton, however, is challenging due to subject-speciﬁc biomechanical movements and muscle activation patterns as well as a subjective range of motion [49]. Perhaps, subject- speciﬁc assistance can reduce the squat effort across users. Recent advances in hardware enabled sophisticated control action, and hence made it possible to personalize assistance for each individual. Subject-speciﬁc assistance was shown to signiﬁcantly reduce the metabolic cost of walking [13], [16], [50] and running [14]. This personalized assistance was implemented using the human in the loop (HIL) optimization method, which identiﬁed the optimal assistance of an exoskele- ton using a physiological signal [12]–[14], [16], [51], [52]. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attrib ution 4.0 License. For more information, see http s://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ KANTHARAJU et al.: REDUCING SQUA T PHYSICAL EFFORT US ING PERSONALIZE D ASSISTANCE 1787 Fig. 1. Experimental setup: HIL optimization for squatting. (A) Robotic ankle-foot orthosis device was used to personalize assistance during squatting by minimizing the metabolic cost. (B) The metabolic cost was estimated using phase-pl ane-based metabolic estimation in combination with a double deep Q learning-based estimation stopping process. (C) The Bayesian optimization was used to select the next assistance parameter based on the metabolic cost feedback. (D) The assistance parameter was used to generate a torque trajectory in an ankle-foot orthosis emulator. The physiological signal was a respiratory measure, but the outcome using this signal takes a long time to determine and is noisy. This has challenged HIL optimization in practice due to the ﬁxed experimental time budget during human subject experiments. Hence, the HIL optimization method was applied in studies on healthy individuals using a sample efﬁcient algorithm, Bayesian optimization, during walking [12], [16], [51] and expert marathon runners during running [14]. To further enhance the sample efﬁciency in order to address the ﬁxed experimental time budget, Kim et. al, coupled the cost estimation method to Bayesian optimization and successfully optimized six control parameters of an exoskeleton [51]. This method used an agent based on Bellman equation to decide whether to stop the prediction or to proceed with the estimation. However, this value- iteration-based method required intensive subject-speciﬁc parameter tuning; therefore, it was less practical. An altern ative to subject-speciﬁc tuning is to replace the value-genera tion system with a parametric- learning-based model using a fully connected neural net- work. An example is deep-Q network (DQN) learning, which has been shown to have signiﬁcant learning ability and has been applied in complex discrete environments [53]. Such fast estimation algorithm could enable the development of subject-speciﬁc assistance for a physically intensive activity such as squatting. In this study, we hypothesized that subject-speciﬁc, person- alized assistance using an ankle exoskeleton would reduce the physical effort of squatting, as shown by reduced metabolic cost and muscle activity levels. The ankle exoskeleton has shown its efﬁcacy for walking and running [14], [34], and we posited that if the device is effective for squatting, a user can use the same device for various scenarios. To test the hypothe- sis, as a preliminary step, we used a unilateral ankle exoskele- ton [54], [55] and we developed a squat assistance controller with free control parameters ( Figure 1). Then, we applied HIL Bayesian optimization to identify subject-speciﬁc free control parameters. For this optimization, we developed a process to stop metabolic cost estimation early to maximize the ﬁxed experimental time budget. The personalization method using the ankle exoskeleton emulator was evaluated through controlled human subject experiments. We mainly compared the personalized assistance to the no-device and powered-off condition, and additionally to a generic condition. We posited that the successful outcomes of this study could be expanded to a bilateral ankle exoskeleton. II. M ETHODS A. Robotic Ankle-Foot Orthosis Emulator We used a tethered ankle-foot orthosis emulator for squatting assistance. The emulator comprises an ankle-foot orthosis end-effector ( Figure 2A), two actuators (Humotech, Pittsburgh, USA), and an off-board controller (Speedgoat Inc., Massachusetts, USA) ( Figure 1A). The exoskeleton provided active assistance using tethered motor actuation for plan- tarﬂexion and passive assistance through elastic bands for dorsiﬂexion. The range of motion of the device assistance was 140 degrees, which is larger than the humans’ ankle angle range [56], and the worn weight was 1.4 kg. Considering the importance of the weight and range of motion [27], [28], this device is an ideal platform for providing squat assistance with a high torque capability: a maximum of 140 Nm. Subjects wore the robotic ankle exoskeleton end-effector on their dom- inant lower limb using two Velcro straps, one on the shin area and the other on the metatarsal. An additional Velcro strap was placed around the heel to restrict lateral movement of the foot. B. Controller Design The controller provided the torque used to assist the user during a squat based on the ankle angle using ascending and descending parameters associated with the squat phase. The ascending and descending parameters were free control parameters that were optimized for each subject. The squat phase was determined by a heuristics-based squatting state estimation method. The squat was divided into four states: descending, bottom, ascending, and stand ( Figure 2B). The state was determined by the subject-speciﬁc angle and angular velocity criteria. The descending state occurred when the subject moved downward by performing hip and knee ﬂexion and ankle dor- siﬂexion. Hence, we used an increasing angular velocity and angle threshold to determine the descending state. The bottom 1788 IEEE TRAN SACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 30, 2022 Fig. 2. Device and torque trajectory design. (A) Robotic ankle-foot orthosis (AFO) device power ed through tethered off-board servomotors. (B) Device state detection and torque trajectory generation. The four s quat states were stand, descending, bottom, and ascending. The torque was generated in the descending and bottom states proportional to the ankle angl e and descending parameter. In the ascending state, the torque was generated proportional to the ankle angle and the ascending parameter. state is the bottom-most point achieved by the subject after descending. Since the bottom state occurs between descent and ascent, the heuristic was based on the angular velocity being close to zero. In the ascending state, the subject moved upward by performing hip and knee extension and ankle plantarﬂexion. The ascending state was recognized when the angle and angular velocity were decreasing. The standing state was identiﬁed when both the ankle angle and the angular velocity were close to zero. We tuned the angle and angular velocity criteria for each subject prior to squat testing. The ankle exoskeleton controller was composed of low-, mid-, and high-level controllers. The low-level controller performed torque and position control using a proportional controller to minimize the error between desired and measured values. The mid-level controller calculated the desired ankle torque by multiplying the ankle angle with a state-dependent parameter. Speciﬁcally, the ascending parameter was used for the ascending state, and the descending torque parameter was used for the descending and bottom state. The ascending and descending parameters were ranged from 0.5% to 3% body weight in Kg/deg with a safety limit of 3 N/deg, and from 0.5 to 1.0 N/deg, respectively. The ascending and descending parameters were free control parameters. During standing, the desired standing angle was commanded. The high-level con- troller was responsible for optimizing the free control parame- ters to minimize the metabolic cost of squatting. Considering sample efﬁciency, we used HIL Bayesian optimization. C. Bayesian Optimization Bayesian optimization (BO) is a non-parametric, sample- efﬁcient, and noise-tolerant close-to global optimization method that is well suited for applications where the cost func- tion is expensive to evaluate. HIL BO typically uses a physi- ological signal from a subject to determine the cost of certain assistance given a parameter; hence the optimization includes the human in the optimization loop [12], [16], [51], [52]. In this study, HIL BO optimized a two-parameter set, corre- sponding to the parameters for the ascending and descending state of the squatting controller. First, we initialized the BO by exploring four randomly selected sets of parameters. During the exploration, assistance was provided to a subject using the parameters while the metabolic cost of squatting was measured. After collecting the initial exploration data, the optimization estimated the posterior distribution of the metabolic cost of squatting using an exoskeleton parameter set via Gaussian process [57], [58]. Then, the acquisition func- tion, Expectation Improvement, used this posterior distribution information to select a new pa rameter set by maximizing the log-likelihood [59], [60]. The parameter was used to determine the assistance provided to a subject, and the subject squatted with the assistance while the respiratory rate was measured to indicate the metabolic cost for the condition. This HIL BO was iterated until either 18 minutes had passed or the optimization selected th e same parameters three times consecutively, as this was considered to indicate convergence. This process is illustrated in Figure 1. In the Gaussian process (GP), we estimated the posterior distribution of the metabolic cost as a function of assistance parameters (ascending and descending parameters, x). The prior of the GP was parameterized using the mean μ(x),a n d covariance matrix k(x, x ′). Similar to previous studies [12], [16], [51], [52], we set the mean to be zero and the covariance function as a squared exponential kernel (Eq. 1) k(x, x′) = σ2 · e(x− x′)L(x− x)T (1) here, L is a diagonal matrix consisting of length scale parame- ters of the descending and ascending conditions l1 and l2, σ is the metabolic cost signal variance, and x, x′ are the discrete control parameters in the parameter space. The samples of the metabolic cost, c(x), were assumed to have an additive, independent, and identically distributed noise. They are expressed as y(x) = c(x) + ϵ, ϵ ∼ N(0,σ 2 noise ) (2) where σ2 noise is the noise variance. Using the prior and data (D ={ X, y}; X = x1 ... xn; y = y1 ... yn), the posterior distribution, y∗,a tap a r a m e t e rs e tx∗, was calculated as y(x∗) ≡ y∗ ∼ N(μx∗, s2 x∗) (3) μ(x∗) = kT n · (K + σ2 noise · I)−1 · y (4) s2(x∗) = k(x∗, x∗) − kT n · (K + σ2 noise · I)−1 · kn (5) where kn is the kernel vector and K is the kernel matrix given as follows: K = ⎛ ⎜⎝ k(x1, x1) ··· k(x1, xn) .. . ... .. . k(x n, x1) ··· k(xn, xn) ⎞ ⎟⎠ kn =[ k(x∗, x1) ,..., k(x∗, xn)] KANTHARAJU et al.: REDUCING SQUA T PHYSICAL EFFORT US ING PERSONALIZE D ASSISTANCE 1789 At each iteration, we optimized hyperparameters θ = [σ,l1, l2,σnoise ] by maximizing the marginal log-likelihood of the collected data set D. The acquisition function, EI, selected the next ascending and descending parameters to be evaluated by maximizing the expected improvement (or maximizing the expected metabolic cost reduction) over the best ascending and descending para- meter set that was previously evaluated using the following equation (Eq 6). EI [x ∗]= ( fbest − μ(x∗)) · (u∗) + s(x∗) · PDF (u∗) (6) where, u∗ is given by ( fbest − μ(x∗))/s(x∗),a n dt h e μ(x∗) and s(x∗) are the posterior distribution mean and covariance corresponding to the x∗ (Eqs. 4, 5). The fbest is the min- imum measured metabolic cost, min i=1,...,N E[y(xi)]. CDF is cumulative distribution function and PDF is probability distribution function of the normal distribution. The EI was set to zero when s∗ was zero. The next parameter, xnext ,t ob e explored was determined using Eq. 7. xnext = argmax x∗(EI [x∗]) (7) D. Metabolic Estimation With Early Stopping Process We used the metabolic cost of squatting as a cost function in the Bayesian optimization. We estimated the metabolic cost using the phase-plane based metabolic estimation [61] with the estimation stopping process. The phase-plane based method converts metabolic cost in the time domain to the phase domain by having the metabolic rate on the horizontal axis (x-axis) and the forward difference metabolic rate on the vertical axis (y-axis) ( Figure 1B). In this phase domain, the steady-state metabolic cost is the point on the metabolic rate trajectory that meets the x-axis. The remaining section of the trajectory is deﬁned as the transient phase. The transient trajec- tory was used to determine the s teady-state metabolic cost by conducting real-time regression using the Variational Bayesian Gaussian Mixture Model (VBGMM) [62]. We calculated the steady-state metabolic cost, M ss ,u s i n gE q .8 . Mss = /Sigma1K k=1 − Bk /Sigma1K k=1 Ak (8) where, K is the total number of gaussian, k is the individual Gaussian cluster, and A, /Sigma1PP x PP y //Sigma1PP x , is the ratio between the cross-covarience, /Sigma1PP x PP y , and covarience component, /Sigma1PP x , along the horizontal axis for each posterior gaussian cluster. PP y is the y-axis of the phase-plane, the forward difference of the metabolic cost axis, and PP x is the x-axis of the phase-plane, the metabolic cost axis. B is the mean deviation, μPP y − A ·μPP x . [μPP x μPP y ]T is the mean of the posterior distribution of each cluster. To maximize the ﬁxed experimental time budget, we devel- oped an indicator of successful completion of the steady-state metabolic rate estimation [51], using the Double Deep Q Learning (DDQN) processing ( Figure 1B), early stopping process. The process made the decision to stop for the real-time metabolic cost estimation if the steady-state condi- tion was estimated with 95% conﬁdence. We used an online value network [53] to decide the optimal action and a target network [63] to calculate the action’s weight. This value was fed into the Bellman equation [53], [63], [64] to train the value network and the target network. The neural network architecture, used in the target and value networks had two internal layers with 256 neuron networks (Q), three input states (S), and two output states (A) ( Figure 1). The three input states corresponded to the following, respectively: (1) The steady-state metabolic rate obtained using Eq. 8; (2) the sum of the likelihood of the steady-state prediction in each Gaussian; and (3) the maximum value of the y-axis of the phase-plane. The output corre- sponded to the two actions: stop the prediction or do not stop the prediction. The action was determined based on the index of the maximum value of the value network (argmax ). For the activation function, we used the rectiﬁed linear function for all layers. We used the Adam optimizer with mean squared error as a cost function for training at each iteration for both target and value networks. The action error of the DDQN algorithm is shown in Eq. (9), and the network update is formulated as shown in Eq. (10). y DDQN t = Rt+1 + v · Q(St+1, argmax A(Q(St+1, At+1; θt), θ− t ) (9) θt+1 = θt + α· (Y DDQN t − Q(St, At; θt))∇ Q(St, At; θt) (10) where, St is the input of the DDQN at the state t, At is the action selected by the network at state t, R is the binary reward comparing the prediction and the actual value, θ and θ− are the weights of the value network and the target network represented as Q, A is the action selected by the DDQN at the current state, v and α are the forgetting factor and the learning rate used in training. We trained the value and target network using the previ- ously collected data [65] and data from Day1 of the squat study. In the training data, we g enerated a categorical label of stop and not-stop conditions by manually calculating the steady-state for each condition. The trained algorithm was not subject-speciﬁc and can be used for future applications. The categorically labeled training data was divided into an 8-to-2 ratio to train and validate the DDQN algorithm. The training process was conducted until achieving 90% accuracy in training and 85% accuracy for validation. We set the learn- ing rate and forgetting factor as 0.001 and 0.97, respectively. During training, for every iteration, DDQN stored the action, state, and desired action for the corresponding state in a replay buffer. The target and value network were trained using this replay buffer. The maximum size of the replay buffer was ﬁxed at 1000 iterations. The training was performed on a batch of 50 samples at each iteration. We used random action applied at randomly selected intervals similar to [63] ensure the exploration. E. Experimental Protocol We performed a two-day experimental protocol consisting of acclimation to the robotic ankle-foot orthosis (Day1) and human-in-the-loop optimization (Day2) with 10 participants (age: 24.6 ± 4.0 years; weight: 79.22 ± 10.4 kg; height 176.65 ± 8.24 cm (mean ± SD); male: 10, female: 0) ( Figure 3). Participants were excluded based on the following conditions: 1790 IEEE TRAN SACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 30, 2022 Fig. 4. Experimental results. (A) Metabolic cost comparison between the no-device condition and optimal condition from the HIL optimization. (B) Rectus femoris (RF) muscle activation comparison between the no-device and optimal conditions. (A, B) The bar graphs present the mean and standard deviation of each measure. * s hows the statistical signiﬁcance. (C) Average normalized rectus femoris muscle activity in time series. (D) Subject-speciﬁc optimized parameters in normalized parameter space (Sub: subject). (E) Measured torque from 3 representative participants. Fig. 3. Squatting protocol. Day1 was the acclimation day , during which four random control parameters were applied along with the unpowered and no-device conditions. On Day2, we conducted human-in-the-loop (HIL) optimization, starting from quiet standing. After HIL optimization with a maximum of 18 min, validation trials were conducted for 4 min, where the optimal condition from the HIL optimization was compared to the unpowered and the no-device conditions. Each squatting condition was composed of repetitions of 2 s of squatting followed by 6 s of rest time. (1) musculoskeletal disorders affecting the subject’s ability to stand or perform a squat (e.g., muscle soreness, muscle contracture); (2) cardiorespira tory/metabolic diseases (e.g., chronic emphysema, orthostatic hypertension, cardiac arrhyth- mia); (3) a history of balance deﬁcits/unexplained falls during standing, walking, or squatting; (4) history of unstable medical conditions (e.g., seizures); or (5) inability to see the TV screen or hear the metronome sound. Informed consent was provided by all participants prior to the study. The study protocol was approved by the University of Illinois at Chicago Institutional Review Board based on the Declaration of Helsinki. On both days, subjects wore the robotic ankle-foot orthosis emulator on their dominant limb. The subject was asked to per- form a full squat or the deepest squat possible with a distance between ankles approximately shoulder-width apart [66], [67]. Based on the subject’s capability, the squat posture and leg position were determined on Day1 and ﬁxed for the complete study. During each squat session, the subject was instructed to perform one squat over 2 s (1 s descending and 1 s ascending) and to stand for 6 s after the squat was performed ( Figure 3). Hence, participants experienced 30 squats for each of 4 min periods. During the HIL optimization, subjects approximately performed 12 squats for each parameter set (excluding warm- up), and they experienced about 9 ± 1 parameter sets. In total, they conducted approximately 105 squats during the optimiza- tion. A metronome and timer were displayed on a screen to the subject to show the rest and squat times. During the study, the squat was observed, and if there was any deviation or inconsistency during the squat, the subject was verbally instructed to achieve the pre deﬁned squat posture and leg position. After each condition, the subject maintained a rest time of 1:3 [68], i.e., 12 min rest for each 4 min squatting session and 54 min rest for an 18 min squatting session. A minimum 24-hour break was provided between the Day1 and Day2 study. We collected respiratory measures (K5, Cosmed, Rome, Italy) to determine the metabolic cost of squatting. We also measured muscle activations using wireless surface elec- tromyography (EMG) at 1259 Hz (Trigno, Delsys, MA, USA) from the rectus femoris (RF), tibialis anterior (TA), soleus (SOL), gastrocnemius medialis (GAS), vastus medialis (V AS), vastus lateralis (VL), bicep femoris (BF), and semitendi- nosus (Semi) muscles [32], [69], [70]. EMG sensors were attached according to instructions from the SENIAM guide- line [71]. We collected foot pressure data using the F-scan insole pressure sensor (Tekscan, MA, USA). The insoles were trimmed to ﬁt and inserted in the subject’s right and left shoes. The sampling rate was set to 5 0 Hz. During the optimal and unpowered conditions, the subjects performed the squatting exercise with foam padding under their shoes on the non- assisted side, to match the height, whereas no foam padding was used for the no-device condition. On Day1 (acclimation day), th e participant experienced a baseline standing condition. Next, the subject experienced six different squatting conditions for 4 min each: four conditions with randomly selected assistance parameter sets, an unpow- ered exoskeleton condition in a random order, and a no device condition (Figure 3). On Day2, participants experienced HIL optimization during a squatting session that lasted a maximum of 18 min, during which the torque proﬁles were changed using a parameter set from the HIL Bayesian optimization. After the HIL optimiza- tion session, we conducted a validation study with each trial consisting of a 4 min squatting session: one optimal parameter condition obtained from the Bayesian optimization and one exoskeleton with the unpowered condition in a random order followed by the no-device condition. We additionally compared the personalized condition to a generic condition. The generic condition was obtained by taking an average of personalized parameters from 10 partic- ipants [47]. Two new particip ants experienced the same Day 1 protocol, followed by a modiﬁed Day 2 protocol. For Day 2, the participant additionally we nt through a generic condition during the validation with a random order for the unpowered, optimal, and generic conditions, followed by the no-device condition while measuring only the metabolic cost. KANTHARAJU et al.: REDUCING SQUA T PHYSICAL EFFORT US ING PERSONALIZE D ASSISTANCE 1791 F . Data Analysis 1) Steady-State Metabolic Cost Calculation : We used the Brockway equation to calculate metabolic rate using the oxygen and carbon dioxide data [72]. We calculated the steady-state metabolic cost using the last 2 min average of the 4 min squatting session. We normalized the steady-state metabolic cost by subtracting the standing condition and then dividing the metabolic rate by body weight. 2) Muscle Activation and Angle Estimation : The eight EMG signals were ﬁltered with a second-order bandpass ﬁlter with a low cut-off frequency of 20 Hz and a high cut-off frequency of 450 Hz, rectiﬁed and ﬁltered with a second-order low pass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz. Inertia measurement unit (IMU) data measured at 148 Hz in the EMG sensor were ﬁltered with a second-order low pass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency of 10 Hz. We used the angular velocity in the normal vector of the sagittal plane of TA IMU to determine the squat phase among the squat start, descending state, bottom state, ascending state, squat end, and stand. We used 0 rad/s as a squat phase determination criterion. The ﬁltered EMG signals in the squat phases with the unpowered exoskeleton condition were averaged. Next, the ﬁltered EMG signals in the squat phases of the optimal parameter and no-device conditions were normalized by the averaged value from the exoskeleton with the unpowered condition. The ﬁltered EMG signals were also used to calculate the peak muscle activity [73], [74]. In addition to estimating the squat phase, IMU in the Tibialis Anterior (TA) muscle’s EMG sensor was used to calculate the approximate ankle angle in the sagittal plane using the gyroscope and acceleration measures. The Euler angles were calculated using the Madgwick ﬁlter [75]. We compared the maximum angle estimates between the unpowered, optimized, and no-device conditions. 3) Foot Force Symmetry : The foot pressure signal was ﬁltered using a low pass ﬁlter at 2 Hz cut-off frequency. The analysis was performed for all three validation conditions, for the ﬁnal 110 s of the squatting exercise, excluding the initial adaptation phase. The squat phase was detected based on the peaks in the pressure signal. The pressure signal during the squat phase was averaged in the time domain. Then, the sum pressure was calculated to estimate ground reaction force during the squat phase. The maximum pressure symmetry between the left and right foot while squatting was calculated using the symmetric index [76] given by the following formula 2 ×| Pright− Pleft Pleft+Pright |. 4) Metabolic Landscape and Probability of Improvement Landscape: The Gaussian process posterior distribution was used to calculate the probability of improvement [59] using the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the metabolic Gaussian process [16] at the personalized (optimal) and generic parameter locations ( Figure 5, bottom row). Also, the GP was used to calculate the potential metabolic cost gain when employing the personalized assistance compared to the generic conditions by sampling the generic and optimal locations in the GP ( Figure 5,t o pr o w ) . 5) Statistical Analysis : Statistical analyses were conducted using Python’s scikit learn stats library for the metabolic cost, and MATLAB for muscle activation. We conﬁrmed the normal distributions of outcome measures using the Shapiro-Wilk test (p > 0.05), except for the metabolic cost between the unpowered condition and the optimal condition (p = 0.048). Then, we performed the paired t-test to evaluate the effect of the exoskeleton assistance with the optimal parameter on metabolic cost and muscle activations by comparing to the no-device condition and exoskeleton with the unpowered condition. Since the metabolic cost between the unpowered condition and the optimal cond ition was not normally distrib- uted, we performed non-parametric Wilcoxon tests. For all statistical analyses, we used a signiﬁcance level of 0.05. III. R ESUL TS Squatting assistance optimized for each participant reduced the steady-state metabolic cost to 2.19 ± 0.7 W · kg−1 from 2.73 ± 0.68 W · kg−1 for the no-device condition. During the validation trial, the net metabolic cost reduction ranged from 3% to 42%, with an average of 19.9 ± 14% (mean ± s.d.; paired t-test, p = 0.008) (Figure 4A). Compared to the unpow- ered condition (2.69 ± 0.6 W·kg−1), the personalized, subject- speciﬁc squatting assistance reduced steady-state metabolic cost by 18.6 ± 14% (mean ± s.d.; Wilcoxon t-test, p = 0.003). For the two participants, compared to the generic condition, the optimal condition reduced the metabolic cost of squatting by 14% and 28%, respectively (Figure. 6). When the Gaussian process landscape for 10 subjects was used ( Figure. 5), the probability of improvement was 0.2 higher for the optimal condition compared to the ge neric condition. Personalized assistance could potentially lower metabolic cost by 0.24 W/kg (t-test, p = 0.01). For the optimal condition, RF activation was reduced by 28.7%, compared to the no-device condition (paired t-test, p = 0.01) ( Figure 4B), and tended to be reduced by 16.8% compared to the unpowered c ondition (paired t-test, p = 0.059). The directly assisted muscles from the device did not show statistically signiﬁcant change. The optimized assistance tended to reduce SOL muscle activity by 10% compared to unpowered (paired t-test p = 0.08) and 16% compared to the no-device condition (paired t-test p = 0.08). The GAS muscle activity also tended to be reduced for the optimal condition compared to the unpowered condition by 11% and the no-device condition by 16% (paired t-test p > 0.2). The other muscles also tended to reduce the muscle activity by more than 4%, but it was not statistically signiﬁcant (paired t-test p > 0.06), except for the Semi, and TA, which tended to increase the activity by more than 6% (paired t-test p > 0.1), for the optimal condition, compared to other conditions. The peak muscle activities were reduced by 30% for the RF (p = 0.001) and by 18% for the VM (paired t-test p = 0.01). The estimated maximum ankle angle change was 31.6, 32.6 and 31 degs on average for the optimal condition, unpowered condition, and normal condition, and the difference was not statistically signiﬁcant (paired t-test p > 0.4). The estimated ground reaction force did not show a statistically signiﬁcant difference between conditions (p > 0.3). The force symmetry did not show a statistically signiﬁcant difference across conditions (paired t-test p > 0.3). The symmetry indexes were 0.39 ± 0.33 (mean ± s.d.) for the no-device condition, 0.53 ± 0.31 (mean ± s.d.) for the unpowered condition, and 0.45 ± 0.28 (mean ± s.d.) for the optimal condition. 1792 IEEE TRAN SACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 30, 2022 Fig. 5. Subject-speciﬁc metabolic cost and probability of Improvement landscape. (T op) The metabolic cost landscape was obtained from the Gaussian process posterior distribution with respect to the ascending and descending parameters. (Bottom) Probability of improvement landscapes captures the probability of reducing the metabolic cost when employing a generic condition compared to the identiﬁed optimal condition. The graphs were obtained from three representative subjects. The scaled optimal assistance parameter ( Figure 4D) showed a large standard deviation for both ascending 0.5 ± 0.38 (mean ± std) and for descending 0.51 ± 0.31 (mean ± std) conditions. These optimal conditions were identiﬁed in 15.8 ± 0.1 min (mean ± std). IV . D ISCUSSION We investigated the effect of personalized assistance pro- vided by a robotic ankle-foot orthosis on the physical effort needed to perform a squatting activity. We hypothesized that the squat effort would be reduced when optimized assistance was provided by the robotic ankle-foot orthosis. We developed a squat assistance method using a unilateral robotic ankle-foot orthosis during the ascending and descending phases of the squat. Each ascending and descending phase had a free con- trol parameter that was optimized using HIL optimization to minimize the metabolic cost of squatting for each subject. The rapid HIL optimization with the faster metabolic cost estimation was able to identif y subject-speciﬁc assistance within 16 minutes. The assistance parameters were widely varied depending on the subject ( Figure 4D). Subject-speciﬁc assistance reduced the metabolic cost of squatting by 19.9% and RF muscle activity by 28.7% com- pared to the condition without th e device. In our additional study, the subject-speciﬁc assistance reduced two subjects’ metabolic costs by 14 and 28% compared to the generic (non-personalized) squat cond ition. The secondary analysis using GP [59] suggests that participants might have reduced metabolic costs less when a generic condition was presented. These results suggest that metabolic cost reduction of squatting can be achieved by providing personalized assistance using a unilateral ankle exoskeleton. When a bilateral exoskele- ton was employed, researcher s observed a larger metabolic cost reduction for walking and running [14], [77]. Similarly, we expect that a bilateral exoskeleton has the potential for further improvement. The main link between redu ced metabolic cost and the underlying mechanism seems to be through muscle activi- ties. During a squat, the quadricep muscles have a higher contribution to the energetic costs [32], [70]. To reduce such muscle activities, squat assistance has typically been provided using a knee exoskeleton [78], [79], and little atten- tion has been devoted to ankle assistance. Ankle assistance can inﬂuence not only ankle muscle activities [80]–[82] but also the activities of other muscles, such as knee ﬂexion muscles during running [81] and walking, especially during the double-support phase [82]. Similar to the double-support phase, the squatting posture forms a closed kinematic chain; hence, ankle assistance can inﬂu ence the quadriceps muscles. The directly assisted ankle muscles showed a tendency of reduction when personalized assistance was given. Future work can include a muscle synergy analysis to fully understand muscle recruitment and coordination patterns [80]. The optimized assistance was w idely varied across partici- pants, which suggests the importance of personalization. The biomechanics of squatting can be varied due to subject-speciﬁc biomechanics [4] and natural range of motion [49], [69]. These subject-speciﬁc characteristics appear to contribute to a unique metabolic rate landscape for each user ( Figure 5), resulting in personalized assistance parameters for both ascending and descending conditions ( Figure 4D) and unique torque proﬁle (Figure 4E). The rapid HIL optimization with the faster metabolic cost estimation was able to identif y subject-speciﬁc assistance within 16 minutes. This fast convergence in HIL optimization enabled optimized assistance for a strenuous squatting activity. This result suggests that this optimization method could be applied to other intensive activities or to individuals with limited strength who have a more limited experimental time budget. Also, the method can help further avoid participant fatigue due to a prolonged trial [83]. Our squat assistance optimization study was limited to an experimental protocol with a ﬁxed duration for each squat using a metronome [26] and large number of repeated of squats. This experimental protocol allowed us to rigorously compare the experimental conditions. However, the use of ﬁxed time and large number of squats could have interfered with the subjects’ natural squatting movement and added more KANTHARAJU et al.: REDUCING SQUA T PHYSICAL EFFORT US ING PERSONALIZE D ASSISTANCE 1793 Fig. 6. Comparison with generic condition with two additional sub- jects. Both subjects A (left) and B (right) presented the lowest metabolic cost for the optimal condition compared to the generic, unpowered, and no-device conditions. strain and fatigue to this movement [83]. Future studies can relax this time constraint and use the number of squats or squatting time as a cost function. Another limitation of the protocol is that the no-device condition was presented towards the end due to the difﬁculty in taking off and on the exoskeleton. This could induce an ordering effect such as a cardiovascular drift to the condition and could inﬂuence the results. In a previous walking study, when the no-device condition was presented in the beginning and towards the end, a statistically signiﬁcant difference was not found between the two [16]. Considering physically intensive characteristic of squatting, the results could be different, and future studies could include a similar experimental protocol for a rigorous comparison. The squat posture can inﬂuence the squat effort. In this study [7], we visually inspected the squat depth during the experiments, and subjects were advised to maintain consistent depth while squatting. As a result, participants appear to maintain consistent squat posture, shown by similar estimated ankle angles. Future studies could include visual feedback with instruction on the subject’s squat posture to further help consistent squat posture [65]. In addition, a motion capture system could be used to more objectively calculate kinematics to understand the underlying mechanism. Additional measurements would be needed to fully under- stand the effect of personalized assistance on user move- ment. In our study, we measured only assisted limb muscle activities. Both assisted limb and unassisted limb contribute to the change in metabolic cost. Additional measurement on the unassisted limb side muscle activity would improve the understanding of the effect of assistance on physical effort. In addition, the foot force symmetry did not show a statistically signiﬁcant difference. The force was obtained by summing the foot pressure after ﬁltering the signal, which may unintentionally exclude important information. Future studies could use accurate force sensors. The inclusion of training in the use of the wearable robot for squatting could further improve the metabolic beneﬁt of squatting assistance. For most of the participants, both the squatting activity and the use of the exoskeleton were new; therefore, they needed to l earn both how to squat [67] and how to use a wearable robot [84]. A previous study suggests that training in the use of a wearable robot can improve the assistance beneﬁt [47]. For instance, a walking study using an exoskeleton showed improved gait performance in the users after training, which could occur over multiple days [84], or by visual guidance [85]. Similar to training for assisted walking [85], subject-speciﬁc training for squatting may help users to learn to squat while beneﬁting from the robot assistance, further reducing the users’ effort. Injury-related metrics can be used for a rigorous evaluation. The current outcome of the reduced mean and peak muscle activities suggests a potential reduction in fatigue [86]–[88]. Fatigue could alter the squatting posture and potentially lead to musculoskeletal injury [88] , [89]. Recent studies have found that fatigue can be correlated to changes in measured knee ﬂexion and extension torque [88], wavelet analysis [86], and frequency domain analysis of muscle activity [86]. Future studies could explore these options and understand the effect of squat assistance on fatigue and potential injury. Fast assistance evaluation metrics with a comfortable sensor may enable the application of HIL optimization in natural settings. The metabolic cost has been a standard metric for evaluating the effectiveness of assistance [12], [13], [15], [16] and hence has been used in HIL optimization. However, the slow mitochondria response, high signal-to-noise ratio, and needed to wear a gas exchange mask have reduced the practi- cality of this metabolic cost measure in a real-world outdoor activity. Alternative physiological measures, such as bilateral muscle activities, foot pressure symmetry, and muscle synergy can be explored in future studies. Future studies could also consider fast optimization schema to rapidly identify optimal assistance to address the long and repeat squatting trial. V. C ONCLUSION This study tested the hypothesis that personalized ankle assistance can reduce the physical effort of a squatting activ- ity. A signiﬁcant reduction in both the muscle activity and steady-state metabolic cost indi cates that even unilateral ankle assistance can effectively assist a squat when applying per- sonalized human-in-the-loop optimization coupled with a fast metabolic cost estimation method. A squat is one of the most intensive activities, and commonly performed by occupational workers. Personalized assistance can reduce physical effort, which has the potential to reduce fatigue. Fatigue could cause an improper posture, which might result in injuries. Future studies could investigate the effects of personalized assistance on fatigue and the potential risk of injuries with additional measures such as the peak knee ﬂexion and exten- sion torque [88]. A CKNOWLEDGMENT The authors thank Dongyual Yoo for his contribution during data acquisition and statistical analysis, and Kishan Patel, Omar Durrani, and Kiro Bakheet for their contribution to the system development and data collection. REFERENCES [1] A. Seireg and R. J. Arvikar, “The prediction of muscular load sharing and joint forces in the lower extremities during walking,” J. Biomech., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 89–102, Mar. 1975. [2] T. Nagura, C. O. Dyrby, E. J. Alexander, and T. P. Andriacchi, “Mechan- ical loads at the knee joint during deep ﬂexion,” J. Orthopaedic Res. , vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 881–886, Jul. 2002. 1794 IEEE TRAN SACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 30, 2022 [3] S. Amin et al., “Occupation-related squatting, kneeling, and heavy lifting and the knee joint: A magnetic resona nce imaging-based study in men,” J. Rheumatol., vol. 35, no. 8, pp. 1645–1649, Aug. 2008. [4] N. J. Dahlkvist, P. Mayo, and B. B. Seedhom, “Forces during squatting and rising from a deep squat,” Eng. Med. , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 69–76, Apr. 1982. [5] L. S. Matthews, D. A. Sonstegard, and J. A. Henke, “Load bearing characteristics of the patello-femoral joint,” Acta Orthopaedica Scandi- navica, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 511–516, Jan. 1977. [6] J. H. Van Dieën, M. J. M. Van Hoozemans, and H. M. Van Toussaint, “A review of biomechanical studies on stoop and squat lifting,” Proc. Hum. Factors Ergonom. Soc. Annu. Meeting , vol. 44, no. 28, pp. 643–646, Jul. 2000. [7] M. Resnick, “Postural changes due to fatigue,” Comput. Ind. Eng. , vol. 31, nos. 1–2, pp. 491–494, Oct. 1996. [8] J. H. van Dieën, P. van der Burg, T. A. J. Raaijmakers, and H. M. Toussaint, “Effects of repetitive lifting on kinematics: Inadequate anticipatory control or adaptive changes?” J. Motor Behav. , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 20–32, Mar. 1998. [9] K. B. Hagen, J. Hallen, and K. Harms-Ringdahl, “Physiological and subjective responses to maximal repetitive lifting employing stoop and squat technique,” Eur . J. Appl. Physiol. Occupational Physiol. , vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 291–297, Oct. 1993. [10] S. Kumar, “The physiological cost of three different methods of lifting in sagittal and lateral planes,” Ergonomics, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 425–433, Apr. 1984. [11] A. Ratkevicius, A. Stasiulis, L. D ubininkaite, and A. Skurvydas, “Muscle fatigue increases metabolic costs of ergometer cycling without changing VO 2 slow component,” J. Sports Sci. Med. , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 440–448, Sep. 2006. [12] M. Kim et al. , “Human-in-the-loop Bayesian optimization of wear- able device parameters,” PLoS ONE , vol. 12, no. 9, Sep. 2017, Art. no. e0184054. [13] J. Zhang et al. , “Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assis- tance during walking,” Science, vol. 356, no. 6344, pp. 1280–1284, Jun. 2017. [14] K. A. Witte, P. Fiers, A. L. Sheets-Singer, and S. H. Collins, “Improving the energy economy of human runni ng with powered and unpowered ankle exoskeleton assistance,” Sci. Robot. , vol. 5, no. 40, Mar. 2020, Art. no. eaay9108. [15] W. Felt, J. C. Selinger, J. M. Done lan, and C. D. Remy, “‘Body-in-the- loop’: Optimizing device parameter s using measures of instantaneous energetic cost,” PLoS ONE, vol. 10, no. 8, Aug. 2015, Art. no. e0135342. [16] Y . Ding, M. Kim, S. Kuindersma, a nd C. J. Walsh, “Human-in-the-loop optimization of hip assistance w ith a soft exosuit during walking,” Sci. Robot., vol. 3, no. 15, Feb. 2018. [17] K. Huysamen, M. de Looze, T. Bosch, J. Ortiz, S. Toxiri, and L. W. O’Sullivan, “Assessment of an active industrial exoskeleton to aid dynamic lifting and lowering manual handling tasks,” Appl. Ergonom. , vol. 68, pp. 125–131, Apr. 2018. [18] M. M. Alemi, S. Madinei, S. Kim, D. Srinivasan, and M. A. Nussbaum, “Effects of two passive back-support exoskeletons on muscle activity, energy expenditure, and subjective assessments during repetitive lift- ing,” Hum. Factors: J. Hum. Factors Ergonom. Soc. , vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 458–474, May 2020. [19] N. Poon, L. van Engelhoven, H. Kazerooni, and C. Harris, “Evaluation of a trunk supporting exoskeleton for reducing muscle fatigue,” Proc. Hum. Factors Ergonom. Soc. Annu. Meeting, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 980–983, Nov. 2019. [20] S. Baltrusch, J. van Dieën, S. Bruijn, A. Koopman, C. van Bennekom, and H. Houdijk, “The effect of a passive trunk exoskeleton on metabolic costs during lifting and walking,” Ergonomics, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 903–916, Apr. 2019. [21] F. Sado, H. J. Yap, R. A. R. Ghazilla, and N. Ahmad, “Design and control of a wearable lower-body exoskeleton for squatting and walking assistance in manual handling works,” Mechatronics, vol. 63, Nov. 2019, Art. no. 102272. [22] S. Luo, G. Androwis, S. Adamovich, H. Su, E. Nunez, and X. Zhou, “Reinforcement learning and control of a lower extremity exoskeleton for squat assistance,” Frontiers Robot. AI , vol. 8, p. 218, Jul. 2021. [23] W. Wei, S. Zha, Y . Xia, J. Gu, and X. Lin, “A hip active assisted exoskeleton that assists the semi-squat lifting,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 7, p. 2424, Apr. 2020. [24] S. Yu et al., “Quasi-direct drive actuation for a lightweight hip exoskele- ton with high backdrivability and high bandwidth,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1794–1802, Aug. 2020. [25] R. K. P. S. Ranaweera, R. Gopura, T. S. S. Jayawardena, and G. K. I. Mann, “Development of a pa ssively powered knee exoskele- ton for squat lifting,” J. Robot., Netw. Artif. Life , vol. 5, pp. 45–51, Jun. 2018. [26] A. Gams, T. Petriˇ c, T. Debevec, and J. Babiˇc, “Effects of robotic knee exoskeleton on human energy expenditure,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. , vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1636–1644, Jun. 2013. [27] S. Yu et al. , “Design and control of a high-torque and highly backdriv- able hybrid soft exoskeleton for knee injury prevention during squatting,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 4579–4586, Oct. 2019. [28] Z. Wang et al. , “A semi-active exoskeleton based on EMGs reduces muscle fatigue when squatting,” Frontiers Neurorobot., vol. 15, p. 30, Apr. 2021. [ 2 9 ] Y .L u ,Q .M e i ,H . - T .P e n g ,J .L i ,C .W e i ,a n dY .G u ,“ Ac o m p a r a t i v e study on loadings of the lower extremity during deep squat in Asian and Caucasian individuals via OpenSim musculoskeletal modelling,” BioMed Res. Int. , vol. 2020, pp. 1–10, Jul. 2020. [30] O. Bordron, C. Huneau, É. Le Carpentier, and Y . Aoustin, “Joint torque estimation during a squat motion,” in Proc. è Français de Mècanique (Brest) , Brest, France, Aug. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/265338856.pdf [31] E. Panero, L. Gastaldi, and W. Rapp, “Two-segment foot model for the biomechanical analysis of squat,” J. Healthcare Eng. , vol. 2017, Aug. 2017, Art. no. 9652948. [32] D. G. E. Robertson, J.-M.-J. Wilson, and T. A. S. Pierre, “Lower extremity muscle functions during full squats,” J. Appl. Biomech. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 333–339, Nov. 2008. [33] T. M. McLaughlin, T. J. Lardner, and C. J. Dillman, “Kinetics of the parallel squat,” Res. Quart. Amer . Alliance Health, Phys. Educ. Recreation, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 175–189, May 1978. [34] S. H. Collins, M. B. Wiggin, and G. S. Sawicki, “Reducing the energy cost of human walking using an unpowered exoskeleton,” Nature, vol. 522, no. 7555, pp. 212–215, 2015. [35] M. Shepertycky, S. Burton, A. Dickson, Y .-F. Liu, and Q. Li, “Removing energy with an exoskeleton reduces the metabolic cost of walking,” Science, vol. 372, no. 6545, pp. 957–960, May 2021. [36] M. B. Wiggin, G. S. Sawicki, and S. H. Collins, “An exoskeleton using controlled energy storage and release to aid ankle propulsion,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot. , Jun. 2011, pp. 1–5. [37] L.-F. Yeung et al. , “Design of an exoskeleton ankle robot for robot- assisted gait training of stroke patients,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot. (ICORR) , Jul. 2017, pp. 211–215. [38] K. Z. Takahashi, M. D. Lewek, and G. S. Sawicki, “A neuromechanics- based powered ankle exoskeleton to assist walking post-stroke: A feasibility study,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. , vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2015. [39] E. M. McCain et al. , “Mechanics and energetics of post-stroke walk- ing aided by a powered ankle exoskeleton with speed-adaptive myo- electric control,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Dec. 2019. [40] N. Lefeber, S. De Buyzer, N. Dassen, E. De Keersmaecker, E. Kerckhofs, and E. Swinnen, “Energy consumption and cost during walking with different modalities of assistance after stroke: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” Disab. Rehabil. , vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 1650–1666, Jun. 2020. [41] A. D. Kuo, “Stabilization of later al motion in passive dynamic walking,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 917–930, 1999. [42] T. McGeer, “Passive dynamic walking,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 62–82, Apr. 1990. [43] R. Tedrake, T. W. Zhang, M.-F. Fong, and H. S. Seung, “Actuating a simple 3D passive dynamic Walker,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. ICRA. , vol. 5, Apr./May 2004, pp. 4656–4661. [44] M. Kim and S. H. Collins, “Once-per-step control of ankle push-off work improves balance in a three-dimensional simulation of bipedal walking,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 406–418, Apr. 2017. [45] D. J. Bregman, M. M. van der Krogt, V . de Groot, J. Harlaar, M. Wisse, and S. H. Collins, “The effect of ankle foot orthosis stiffness on the energy cost of walking: A simulation study,” Clin. Biomech. , vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 955–961, 2011. [46] M. L. Handford and M. Srinivasan, “Energy-optimal human walking with feedback-controlled robotic pros theses: A computational study,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1773–1782, Sep. 2018. [47] K. L. Poggensee and S. H. Collins, “How adaptation, training, and customization contribute to beneﬁts from exoskeleton assistance,” Sci. Robot., vol. 6, no. 58, Sep. 2021, Art. no. eabf1078. KANTHARAJU et al.: REDUCING SQUA T PHYSICAL EFFORT US ING PERSONALIZE D ASSISTANCE 1795 [48] R. W. Jackson and S. H. Collins, “An experimental comparison of the relative beneﬁts of work and torque assistance in ankle exoskeletons,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 119, no. 5, pp. 541–557, 2015. [49] P. A. Swinton, R. Lloyd, J. W. L. Keogh, I. Agouris, and A. D. Stewart, “A biomechanical comparison of th e traditional squat, powerlifting squat, and box squat,” J. Strength Conditioning Res. , vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1805–1816, Jul. 2012. [50] M. Kim, T. Chen, T. Chen, and S. H. Collins, “An ankle–foot prosthesis emulator with control of plantarﬂe xion and inversion–eversion torque,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 1183–1194, Oct. 2018. [51] M. Kim et al., “Bayesian optimization of soft exosuits using a metabolic estimator stopping process,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2019, pp. 9173–9179. [52] T.-C. Wen, M. Jacobson, X. Zhou, H.-J. Chung, and M. Kim, “The personalization of stiffness for an ankle-foot prosthesis emulator using human-in-the-loop optimization,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) , Oct. 2020, pp. 3431–3436. [53] V . Mnih et al. , “Playing atari with deep re inforcement learning,” 2013, arXiv:1312.5602. [54] M. Jacobson and M. Kim, “Ankle Ti-Rex: 2 degrees of freedom ankle- foot orthosis,” U.S. Patent, May 2022. [55] M. Jacobson and M. Kim, “2DoF robotic ankle exoskeleton,” in Proc. Dyn. Walking, Virtual Meeting , Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.dynamicwalking2021.org/episode-1-biomechanics [56] C. L. Brockett and G. J. Chapman, “Biomechanics of the ankle,” Orthopaedics Trauma, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 232–238, 2016. [57] C. K. Williams and C. E. Rasmussen, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning, vol. 2, no. 3. Cambridge , MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006. [58] F. Pérez-Cruz, S. Van Vaerenbergh, J. Murillo-Fuentes, M. Lazaro-Gredilla, and I. Santamaria, “Gaussian processes for nonlinear signal processing: An overview of recent advances,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 40–50, Jul. 2013. [59] H. J. Kushner, “A new method of locating the maximum point of an arbitrary multipeak curve in the presence of noise,” J. Basic Eng. , vol. 86, no. 1, pp. 97–106, Mar. 1964. [60] E. Brochu, V . M. Cora, and N. de Freitas, “A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions, with application to active user modeling and hierarchi cal reinforcement learning,” 2010, arXiv:1012.2599. [61] P. Kantharaju and M. Kim, “Estimation of steady state metabolic using non-linear dynamics,” in Proc. Dyn. Walking, Virtual Meet- ing, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.seas.upenn.edu/~posa/ DynamicWalking2020/663-983-1-RV.pdf [62] D. M. Blei and M. I. Jordan, “Variati onal inference for Dirichlet process mixtures,” Bayesian Anal. , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 121–143, 2006. [63] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell. , vol. 30, no. 1, 2016. [64] V . Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learn- ing,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. [65] M. Kim et al. , “Visual guidance can help with the use of a robotic exoskeleton during human walking,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, p. 3881, Mar. 2022. [66] R. F. Escamilla, G. S. Fleisig, T. M. Lowry, S. W. Barrentine, and J. R. Andrews, “A three-dimensional biomechanical analysis of the squat during varying stance widths,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. , vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 984–998, Jun. 2001. [67] A. M. Kushner et al. , “The back squat Part 2: Targeted training techniques to correct functional deﬁ cits and technical factors that limit performance,” Strength Conditioning J. , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 13–60, Apr. 2015. [68] R. Rahimi, “Effect of different rest intervals on the exercise volume completed during squat bouts,” J. Sports Sci. Med. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 361–366, Dec. 2005. [69] B. J. Schoenfeld, “Squatting kinematics and kinetics and their applica- tion to exercise performance,” J. Strength Conditioning Res. , vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 3497–3506, 2010. [70] K. B. Smale, M. S. Shourijeh, and D. L. Benoit, “Use of muscle synergies and wavelet transforms t o identify fatigue during squatting,” J. Electromyogr . Kinesiol., vol. 28, pp. 158–166, Jun. 2016. [71] H. J. Hermens et al. , “European recommendations for surface elec- tromyography,” Roessingh Res. Dev. , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 13–54, 1999. [72] J. M. Brockway, “Derivation of formulae used to calculate energy expenditure in man,” Hum. Nutrition. Clin. Nutrition , vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 463–471, 1987. [73] S. Galle, P. Malcolm, W. Derave, and D. De Clercq, “Adaptation to walking with an exoskeleton that assists ankle extension,” Gait Posture, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 495–499, Jul. 2013. [74] G. S. Sawicki and D. P. Ferris, “Mechanics and energetics of level walking with powered ankle exoskeletons,” J. Exp. Biol., vol. 211, no. 9, pp. 1402–1413, 2008. [75] S. Madgwick, “An efﬁcient orientation ﬁlter for inertial and iner- tial/magnetic sensor arrays,” Rep. X-Io Univ. Bristol (U.K.) , vol. 25, pp. 113–118, Apr. 2010. [76] R. O. Robinson, W. Herzog, an d B. M. Nigg, “Use of force plat- form variables to quantify the eff ects of chiropractic manipulation on gait symmetry,” J. Manipulative Physiol. Therapeutics , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 172–176, 1987. [77] G. M. Bryan et al. , “Optimized hip–knee–ankle exoskeleton assistance at a range of walking speeds,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. , vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Mar. 2021. [78] J. C. Selinger and J. M. Donelan, “E stimating instantaneous energetic cost during non-steady-state gait,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 117, no. 11, pp. 1406–1415, 2014. [79] M. P. de Looze, T. Bosch, F. Krause, K. S. Stadler, and L. O’Sullivan, “Exoskeletons for industrial application and their potential effects on physical work load,” Ergonomics, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 671–681, 2016. [80] K. M. Steele, R. W. Jackson, B. R. Shuman, and S. H. Collins, “Muscle recruitment and coordination with an ankle exoskeleton,” J. Biomech. , vol. 59, pp. 50–58, Jul. 2017. [81] T. K. Uchida, A. Seth, S. Pouya , C. L. Dembia, J. L. Hicks, and S. L. Delp, “Simulating ideal assistive devices to reduce the metabolic cost of running,” PLoS ONE , vol. 11, no. 9, Sep. 2016, Art. no. e0163417. [82] C. L. Dembia, A. Silder, T. K. Uchida, J. L. Hicks, and S. L. Delp, “Simulating ideal assistive devices to reduce the metabolic cost of walking with heavy loads,” PLoS ONE , vol. 12, no. 7, Jul. 2017, Art. no. e0180320. [83] J. M. González-Hernández et al. , “Mechanical, metabolic, and per- ceptual acute responses to different s et conﬁgurations in full squat,” J. Strength Conditioning Res. , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1581–1590, Jun. 2020. [84] K. Y . Nam, H. J. Kim, B. S. Kwon, J.-W. Park, H. J. Lee, and A. Yoo, “Robot-assisted gait traini ng (Lokomat) improves walking function and activity in people with spinal cord injury: A systematic review,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Dec. 2017. [85] R. F. Reynolds and B. L. Day, “Visual guidance of the human foot during a step,” J. Physiol. , vol. 569, no. 2, pp. 677–684, Dec. 2005. [86] M. Cifrek, V . Medved, S. Tonkovi´c, and S. Ostoji´c, “Surface EMG based muscle fatigue evaluation in biomechanics,” Clin. Biomech. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 327–340, 2009. [87] J.-H. Lee, S. Kim, J. Heo, D.-H. Park, and E. Chang, “Differences in the muscle activities of the quadriceps femoris and hamstrings while performing various squat exercises,” BMC Sports Sci., Med. Rehabil. , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 12, Jan. 2022. [88] H. S. Longpré, S. M. Acker, and M. R. Maly, “Muscle activation and knee biomechanics during squatting a nd lunging after lower extremity fatigue in healthy young women,” J. Electromyogr . Kinesiol., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 40–46, Feb. 2015. [89] B. Bazrgari, A. Shirazi-Adl, a nd N. Arjmand, “Analysis of squat and stoop dynamic liftings: Muscle forces and internal spinal loads,” Eur . Spine J., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 687–699, May 2007.