Dynamic Movement Primitives in Robotics: A Tutorial Survey Journal Title XX(X):1–43 ©The Author(s) 2016 Reprints and permission: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned www.sagepub.com/ SAGE Matteo Saveriano1, Fares J. Abu-Dakka2, Aljaˇ z Kramberger3, and Luka Peternel4 Abstract Biological systems, including human beings, have the innate ability to perform complex tasks in versatile and agile manner. Researchers in sensorimotor control have tried to understand and formally deﬁne this innate property. The idea, supported by several experimental ﬁndings, that biological systems are able to combine and adapt basic units of motion into complex tasks ﬁnally lead to the formulation of the motor primitives theory. In this respect, Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) represent an elegant mathematical formulation of the motor primitives as stable dynamical systems, and are well suited to generate motor commands for artiﬁcial systems like robots. In the last decades, Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) have inspired researchers in different robotic ﬁelds including imitation and reinforcement learning, optimal control, physical interaction, and human–robot co-working, resulting a considerable amount of published papers. The goal of this tutorial survey is two-fold. On one side, we present the existing DMPs formulations in rigorous mathematical terms, and discuss advantages and limitations of each approach as well as practical implementation details. In the tutorial vein, we also search for existing implementations of presented approaches and release several others. On the other side, we provide a systematic and comprehensive review of existing literature and categorize state of the art work on DMP. The paper concludes with a discussion on the limitations of DMPs and an outline of possible research directions. Keywords Motor control of artiﬁcial systems, Movement primitives theory, Dynamic movement primitives, Learning from demonstration 1 Introduction How biological systems, like humans and animals, execute complex movements in a versatile and creative manner? In the past decades, researchers of neurobiology and motor control have made a signiﬁcant effort trying in to answer this research question and their experimental ﬁndings lead to the formulation of the motor or motion primitives theory. The motion primitives theory explains the execution of complex motion with the ability of biological systems of sequencing and adapting units of actions, the so-called motion primitives (Mussa-Ivaldi 1999; Flash and Hochner 2005). Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) have their roots in the motor control of biological systems and can be seen as a rigorous mathematical formulation of the motion primitives as stable nonlinear dynamical systems (Schaal 2006a,b). In this respect, DMPs represent one of the ﬁrst attempts to answer the research question: How artiﬁcial systems, like (humanoid) robots, can execute complex movements in a versatile and creative manner? Beyond their biological motivation, DMPs have a simple and elegant formulation, guarantee convergence to a given target, are sufﬁciently ﬂexible to create complex behaviors, are capable of reacting to external perturbations in real-time, and can be learned from data using efﬁcient algorithms. These properties explain the “success” of DMPs in robotic applications, where they have established as a prominent tool for learning and generation of motor commands. Since their formulation in the pioneering work from Ijspeert et al. (Ijspeert et al. 2001, 2002c), DMPs have been successfully exploited in a variety of applications, becoming de facto the ﬁrst approach that novices in the Imitation Learning (IL) ﬁeld use on their robots. 1.1 Existing surveys and tutorials The popularity of DMPs resulted in a large amount of work that use, modify, or extend the original formulation of Ijspeert and colleagues. In this paper, we name classical DMPs the DMP formulation initially presented in (Ijspeert et al. 2001) and further reﬁned in (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b). As shown in Table 1, some tutorials and surveys already tried to categorize and review existing work on DMPs. 1Department of Computer Science and Digital Science Center, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria 2Intelligent Robotics Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation (EEA), Aalto University, Espoo, Finland. 3SDU Robotics, the Maersk McKinney Moller Institute, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. 4Delft Haptics Lab, Department of Cognitive Robotics, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands Corresponding author: Fares J. Abu-Dakka, Intelligent Robotics Group, Department of Electrical Engineering and Automation (EEA), Aalto University, Maarintie 8, 02150 Espoo, Finland. Email: fares.abu-dakka@aalto.ﬁ Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20] arXiv:2102.03861v1 [cs.RO] 7 Feb 2021 2 Journal Title XX(X) Table 1. Comparison between existing reviews and tutorial about DMPs and our tutorial survey. Survey/Tutorial Topics Description (Schaal et al. 2007) • Classical DMPs • Online adaptation • Optimization A tutorial that provides a unifying view on the two main approaches used to develop computational motor control theories, namely differential equations and optimal control. In this work, discrete and rhythmic DMPs (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b) are presented as a computational model of the motor primitives theory (Mussa-Ivaldi 1999) that uniﬁes nonlinear differential equations and optimal control. The tutorial has a section dedicated to DMP parameters optimization beyond ILs. Schaal et al. show how to optimize DMP parameters to minimize various costs describing, for instance, the total jerk of the trajectory or the end-point variance. (Ijspeert et al. 2013) • Classical DMPs • Generalization • Online adaptation • Coupling terms A tutorial on classical DMPs that presents both discrete and rhythmic formulations, mostly developed in (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b,a), and their application in IL and movement recognition. The tutorial also presents extensions of the classical DMP formulation to prevent high accelerations at the beginning of the motion, to avoid collisions with unforeseen obstacles (Pastor et al. 2009), and to generalize both in space (e.g., reach a different goal) and time (e.g., produce longer/shorter trajectories). (Pastor et al. 2013) • Classical DMPs • Online adaptation • Coupling terms • Impedance learning A tutorial on classical DMPs that presents both discrete and rhythmic formulations, mostly developed in (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b,a). The tutorial also presents extensions of the classical DMP formulation to avoid collisions with unforeseen obstacles (Pastor et al. 2009) and to learn impedance control policies via Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Buchli et al. 2011b). The key difference between this tutorial and the one from (Ijspeert et al. 2013) is the section dedicated to sensory association and online, context-aware adaptation of DMP trajectories using the associative skill memory framework developed in (Pastor et al. 2011; Pastor et al. 2011). (Deniˇsa et al. 2016b) • Classical DMPs • CMPs A tutorial on CMPs, a framework developed to generate compliant robot behaviors that accurately track a reference trajectory. CMPs exploit classical DMPs to generate the desired kinematic landscape and encode task-dependent dynamics as a combination of Gaussian basis functions (torque primitives). The tutorial show how to learn torque primitives from training data, how to generalize CMPs to new situations, and how to combine existing CMPs to synthesize new robot motions. Survey and Tutorial Topics Description This paper DMP tutorial • Classical • Orientation • SPD • Joining • Generalization • Online adaptation DMP survey • (Co-)Manipulation • Variable impedance • Physical interaction • Rehabilitation • Teleoperation • Motion recognition • Reinforcement, deep, and lifelong learning This tutorial survey conducts a wide scan of the existing DMP literature with the aim of categorizing and presenting the published work in the ﬁeld. The main objective of this comprehensive literature review is give the reader an exhausting overview on DMP related research, on its major achievements, as well as on open issues and possible research directions. Our tutorial survey also provides a structured and uniﬁed formulation for different methods developed starting from the classical DMPs proposed by (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b). We believe that such formulation contributes to easier the understanding of different methods and extension that can be found in the literature, clarifying connections and differences among the existing approaches. The tutorial survey also provides an analysis on pros and cons of various methods and a discussion with guidelines for different application scenarios. Schaal et al. (2007) presented the classical DMPs as an attempt to unify nonlinear dynamical systems and optimal control theory, i.e., the two prominent frameworks used to derive computational models of neuro-biological motor theories (Mussa-Ivaldi 1999; Flash and Hochner 2005). In their tutorial paper, Ijspeert et al. (2013) presented a homogeneous formulation of rhythmic and discrete DMPs together with some extensions including coupling terms, generalization to different goal, and online adaptation for collision avoidance. They also described possible applications in IL and motion recognition methods. In the same year, Pastor et al. (2013) published their tutorial on classical DMPs with a special focus on online adaptation of the DMP attractor landscape by integrating the perceptual Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 3 Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) Tutorial Sections 2 and 3 Formulation Extentions Survey Sections 4 and 5 Integration Applications Classical discrete and periodic Orientation Symmetric positive deﬁnite matrix Generalization Joining On-line adaptation Alternative formulations Manipulation tasks Variable impedance Reinforcement learning Deep learning Life-long learning Contact with passive environments Human– robot co- manipulation Human assistance, augmentation & rehabilitation Teleoperation High degrees of freedom Motion analysis and recognition Autonomous driving and ﬁeld robotics Discussion (Section 6) Guidelines Available code Open issues Figure 1. The structure of this tutorial survey on DMPs. information into the action generation process. Later on, Deniˇsa et al. (2016b) reviewed the so-called Compliant Movement Primitive (CMP), which was ﬁrst introduced by Petriˇc et al. (2014a). CMPs combine classical DMP to generate the desired kinematic path and torque primitives— a weighted summation of Gaussian basis functions—to generate task-speciﬁc dynamics. As shown in the review, CMPs are capable of accurately tracking the kinematic path in a compliant manner, which makes them well suited for tasks that require interaction of the robot with the environment. However the above-mentioned reviews and tutorials primarily focused on the methods and advancements within their respective research group and/or focused on a speciﬁc problem or ﬁeld of application. On the other hand, the DMPs related literature is extensive and broad, with contributions from many research groups that made advancements in several important ﬁelds of application. Therefore, the proposed survey and tutorial on DMPs aims to scan a wider range and present a tutorial with uniﬁed and structured formulations for various DMPs methods and advancements up to date. This should make it clearer for the users to see the differences and connections between various methods, and can contribute to easier application. In addition, we provide a more comprehensive and categorised survey of all major DMPs application areas in robotics. This can help to inspire the readers to apply the DMPs in various areas. In the tutorial part, we present mathematical formulations, implementation details, and potential issues of existing DMP formulations starting from the classical DMPs presented in (Ijspeert et al. 2002c,b) up to recent extensions of DMPs to Riemannian geometry and Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite (SPD) matrices (Abu-Dakka and Kyrki 2020). In the survey part, we meticulously review existing literature on DMPs in a comprehensive and methodological manner by focusing on the quality and signiﬁcance of their continuations without putting a bias on any particular research group. Details on the systematic review procedure are given as follows. Prepared using sagej.cls 4 Journal Title XX(X) 1.2 Systematic review process We preformed am automatic search for documents contain- ing the string Dynamic Movement Primitive in Scopus on 25 November 2020 returned 1223 papers. We found that Scopus lists papers only from2004 on. Therefore, we manually track related work from 2001 (preliminary work on DMPs) to 2003. We further reﬁned the search on 01 February 2021 to include last minute papers. We manually inspect all the papers and removed the ones that do not explicitly use DMPs and that only compare against DMP in their literature review. The ﬁrst and foremost selection criteria were the technical quality of work and the signiﬁcance of the contribution with respect the DMP state- of-the-art prior to the publication of any particular paper. In other words, we asked the question ’did the paper make a signiﬁcant step change in the ﬁeld?’. Therefore, we discarded papers that presented similar (or same) ideas multiple times, or that made insigniﬁcant improvements to the state-of-the- art. If multiple papers presented the same/similar idea, we included the one with the most comprehensive technical quality, and if the quality was similar, the next deciding factors were publication in more prestigious journals/venues or the most cited ones. This manual selection led to the 276 papers on DMPs (out of a total of 328 references) analyzed in this work. 1.3 A taxonomy of DMP related research The systematic review of DMP literature lead to the taxonomy shown in Fig. 1, which also describes the structure of this paper. DMPs are placed at the root of the tree and branch into two nodes, namely thetutorial and the survey. In the tutorial part we present different DMP formulations and extensions in rigorous mathematical terms. The tutorial part spans Sections 2 and 3. Section 2 embraces DMPs formulations for discrete and periodic motions, orientation trajectories, and SPDs matrices. Section 3 discusses extensions of the DMP formalism to account for skills generalization, joining of multiple primitives, online adaptation based on force feedback or reference velocity. The section ends with a short description of DMP related formulations. The survey part spans Sections 4 and 5. Section 4 presents DMPs integration in larger executive frameworks formanip- ulation and variable impedance tasks, reinforcement, deep, and life-long learning . Section 5 presents DMPs in differ- ent robotic applications including physical interaction, co- manipulation, rehabilitation, teleoperation, motion recogni- tion, humanoids and ﬁeld robotics, and autonomous driving. The paper ends with a discussion (Section 6) of presented approaches with the aim of providing, where possible, guide- lines to select the most suitable DMP approach for speciﬁc needs. We have also collected available DMP implementa- tions (see Table 4) and contributed to the community with further open source implementations available at https: //gitlab.com/dmp-codes-collection. Section 6 terminates with a discussion on open issues and possible research directions. 1.4 Contribution overview Our paper has several key contributions that are summarized as follows. Concerning the tutorial part: • We present the classical DMP formulation and existing variations of this formulation in a uniﬁed manner with rigorous mathematical terms, providing implementation details and discussing advantages and limitations of different approaches (Section 2). • We describe advanced approaches where DMPs are integrated into sophisticated control and/or larger executive frameworks (Section 3). • We release to the community several implementations of described approaches. Detailed information on these code repositories are provided in Table 4 and Section 6. Moreover, we search for existing open- source implementations of the presented formulations and list them in our repository (Section 6.2). Concerning the survey part: • We perform a systematic literature search to provide a comprehensive and unbiased review of the topic (Sections 4 and 5). • We categorize existing work on DMPs into different streams and highlight prominent approaches in each category (Fig. 1 and Sections 4 and 5). • We present guidelines to select the the most suitable approach for different applications, discuss limitations inherent to the DMP formalism, and highlight open issues and possible research directions (Section 6). 2 Formulation of DMPs types In this section, we will provide a complete description of the standard formulation of DMPs. Speciﬁcally, point attractors formulation—to encode discrete point-to point motions— in Section 2.1, and cycle attractors formulation—to encode rhythmic-patterns motions—in Section 2.2. For a better understanding, we have summarized the key notations and the used abbreviations in Table 2. 2.1 Discrete DMP The discrete DMP is used to encode a point-to-point motion into a stable dynamical system. In the following subsections, we will go through the formulation and main features of discrete DMPs starting by the classical one operating in R space (Section 2.1.1), then passing by Cartesian space— S3 and SO(3)—in Section 2.1.2, and ending by DMP formulation for SPD space (Sm ++) in Section 2.1.3. 2.1.1 Classical DMP The classical discrete DMPs were ﬁrst introduced by Ijspeert et al. (2002c). A DMP for a single DoF trajectory y of a discrete movement (point-to-point) is deﬁned by the following set of nonlinear differential equations (Ijspeert et al. 2002c, 2013) τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y)−z) +f(x), (1) τ ˙y =z, (2) τ ˙x =αxx, (3) Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 5 Table 2. Description of key notations and abbreviations. Indices, super/subscripts, constants, and variables have the same meaning over the whole text. N ≜ # of nonlinear basis functions i ≜ index:i = 1,2,...,N J ≜ # of joints or Degree of Freedoms (DoFs)j ≜ index:j = 1,2,...,J L ≜ # of demonstrations or DMPs l ≜ index:l = 1,2,...,L V ≜ # of via-points or via-goals v ≜ index:v = 1,2,...,V T ≜ # of datapoints  ≜ index: = 1,2,..., T m ≜ dimensions ofSm++ n ≜ dimensions ofRn {·}d ≜ subscript for desired value {·}q or{·}q ≜ quaternion related variable {·}R or{·}R ≜ rotation matrix related variable {·}++,{·}+ or{·}+ ≜ SPD related variable {·}g ≜ subscript for goal value αz,βz,αx,αs,αg, αyx,αqg ≜ positive gains τ ≜ time modulation parameter ci,hi ≜ centers and widths of Gaussians T ≜ time duration t ≜ continuous time λ ≜ forgetting factor r ≜ amplitude modulation parameter x ≜ phase variable y, ˙y ≜ trajectory data and its 1st derivative s ≜ sigmoidal decay phase z, ˙z ≜ scaled velocity and acceleration p ≜ piece-wise linear phase g, gq, g+ ≜ attractor point (goal) in different spaces ω ≜ angular velocity ˆg, ˆgq and˜g, ˜gq ≜ moving target and delayed goal function in different spaces Qt, ˙Qt ≜ joint position, its 1st time-derivative gv ≜ intermediate attractor (via-goal) q, ˙ q ≜ unit quaternion, its 1st time-derivative R, ˙R ≜ rotation matrix, its 1st time-derivative f, fq, fR, fq, F+ ≜ forcing term for different spaces wi ≜ adjustable weights Ψi ≜ basis functions θ andϑ ≜ an angle and learnable parameters Sm++ ≜ m×mSPD manifold Symm ≜ m×msymmetric matrices space M ≜ a Riemannian manifold X ≜ an arbitrary SPD matrix TΛM ≜ a tangent space ofMat an arbitrary pointΛ M ≜ the mean of{Xt}Tt=1 ϱ = LogΛ(Υ) ≜ M↦→T ΛM, maps an arbitrary pointΥ∈ Mintoϱ∈T ΛM Υ= ExpΛ(ϱ) ≜ TΛM↦→M, mapsϱ∈T ΛMintoΥ∈M vec(·) ≜ a function transformsSymm into Rn using Mandel’s notation. mat(·) ≜ a function transformsRn intoSymm using Mandel’s notation. k,K, KP, KO ≜ different forms of stiffness gains D,DV, DW ≜ different forms of damping gains MandI ≜ mass and inertia matrices F, fe andτe ≜ forces and external forces and torques DMP Dynamic Movement Primitive IL Imitation Learning RL Reinforcement Learning SPD Symmetric Positive Deﬁnite DoF Degree of Freedom RBF Radial Basis Function LWR Locally Weighted Regression GMM Gaussian Mixture Model GMR Gaussian Mixture Regression GP Gaussian Process NN Neural Network VMP Via-points Movement Primitive ProMP Probabilistic Movement Primitives LfD Learning from Demonstration GPR Gaussian Process Regression MoMP Mixture of Motor Primitives EMG Electromyography ILC Iterative Learning Control VIC Variable Impedance Control VILC Variable Impedance Learning Control PI2 Policy Improvement with Path Integrals CMA-ES Covariance Matrix Adaptation-Evolution Strategies CC-DMP Coordinate Change-DMPs RBF-NN Radial Basis Function-Neural Network PoWER Policy Learning by Weighting Exploration with the ReturnsHRL Hierarchical RL AEDMP AutoEncoded DMP CNN Convolutional Neural Network GPDMP Global Parametric Dynamic Movement Primitive UAV Unmanned Areal Vehicle wherex is the phase variable and z is an auxiliary variable. Parametersαz andβz deﬁne the behavior of the second order system described by (1) and (2). With the choice τ >0, αz = 4βz and αx > 0, the convergence of the underlying dynamic system to a unique attractor point at y =g, z = 0 is ensured (Ijspeert et al. 2013). Alternatively, the gains αz and βz can be learned from training data while preserving the convergence of the system (Tan et al. 2016). In the DMP literature, equations (1)–(2), as well as their periodic counterpart (33)–(34), are called thetransformation system, while (3) (or (35)) is the canonical system . f(x) is deﬁned as a linear combination of N nonlinear Radial Basis Functions (RBFs), which enables the robot to follow any smooth trajectory from the initial positiony0 to the ﬁnal conﬁgurationg f(x) = ∑N i=1wiΨi(x) ∑N i=1 Ψi(x) x, (4) Ψi(x) = exp ( −hi (x−ci)2 ) , (5) where ci are the centers of Gaussian basis functions distributed along the phase of the movement and hi their widths. For a given N and setting τ equal to the total duration of the desired movement, we can deﬁne ci = exp ( −αx i−1 N−1 ) , hi = 1 (ci+1−ci)2 and hN =hN−1 where i = 1,...,N . For each DoF, the weights wi should be adjusted from the measured data so that the desired behavior is achieved. The selection of the number of weights should be based on the desired resolution of the trajectory. For controlling a robotic system with more than one DoF, we represent the movement of every DoF with its own equation system (1)–(2), but with the common phase (3) to synchronize them. 2.1.1.1 Learning the forcing term For a discrete motion, given a demonstrated trajectory yd(t), t = 1,..., T and its time derivatives ˙yd(t) and ¨yd(t), it is possible to invert (1) and approximate the desired shape fd as fd(t) =τ 2¨yd(t)−αz (βz (g−yd(t))−τ ˙yd(t)). (6) Prepared using sagej.cls 6 Journal Title XX(X) 1 0.5 0 0.60 1.2 6 0 -6 0.60 1.2 1 2 0 0.60 1.2 1 0.5 0 0.60 1.2 0.60 1.2 Time [s] -30 30 0 0.60 1.2 Time [s] 1 0.5 0 Figure 2. A classical DMP is used to generate a discrete motion connectingx0 = 0 andg = 1 (green line in the top left panel). The training data (black dashed lines) are obtained from a minimum jerk trajectory connectingx0 andg inT = 1 s and used to learn the weightswi of 10 Gaussian basis functions equally distributed in time. The results of the parameters learning procedure are shown in the bottom right panel. The exponentially decaying phase variable is used as shown in the middle right panel. Results are obtained with the open source implementation available at www-clmc.usc.edu/ software/git/gitweb.cgi?p=matlab/dmp.git. By stacking eachfd(t) andwi into the column vectors F =[fd(t1),...,f d(tT)]⊤ and w = [w1,...,w N ]⊤, we obtain the following linear system Φw = F, (7) where Φ =   Ψ1(x1)∑N i=1 Ψi(x1)x1 ··· ΨN(x1)∑N i=1 Ψi(x1)x1 ... ... ... Ψ1(xT)∑N i=1 Ψi(xT)xT ··· ΨN(xT)∑N i=1 Ψi(xT)xT  . (8) Locally Weighted Regression (LWR) (Atkeson et al. 1997; Schaal and Atkeson 1998; Ude et al. 2010) is a popular approach used to update the weightswi. LWR uses the error between the desired trajectory shape and currently learned shape and a forgetting factorλ to update the weights as P = 1 λ ( P−1− P−1ϕϕ ⊤P−1 λ +ϕ⊤P−1ϕ ) , (9) w = w−1 + (fd(t)−ϕ ⊤w−1)Pϕ. (10) In the previous equations w = w(t) andϕ is the column vector obtained by transposing the-th row of Φ. The initial value of the parameters is P0 = I, w0 = 0. A discrete DMP learned on synthetic data is shown in Figure 2. LWR has been the standard method to learn the weights of DMPs and therefore f(x). As an alternative to LWR, (Krug and Dimitrovz 2013) have shown that learning a forcing term deﬁned as in (4) can be formulated as a quadratic optimization problem and efﬁciently solved. 0.5 1 0 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 Time [s] sigmoidal linear exponential Figure 3. Possible phase variables used in different discrete DMP formulations. All the different possibilities ensure that x,s,p → 0 fort→ +∞ (fort>T in practice). In general, the problem of learning and retrieving f(x) can be in principle solved with any regression technique (Stulp et al. 2013). For instance, Wang et al. (2016) modiﬁed f(x) in (4) by considering a bias term bi, i.e., wix + bi, and used truncated kernels ( Ψi vanishes if x−ci is smaller than a threshold). This formulation, called DMP+, produces more accurate trajectories than the original DMP. Moreover, a learned trajectory can be modiﬁed by updating only a subset of the weights. Other work focused on using multiple demonstrations to increase the generalization power of the learned primitive. To learn a suitable forcing term from multiple demonstrations, some authors used Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) (Yin and Chen 2014; Pervez et al. 2017a) and Gaussian Mixture Regression (GMR) (Cohn et al. 1996), while others adopted Gaussian Process (GP) (Fanger et al. 2016; Umlauft et al. 2017) (Rasmussen and Williams 2006), or exploited a deep Neural Network (NN) (Pervez et al. 2017b; Pahiˇc et al. 2020) developed originally in (LeCun et al. 2015). 2.1.1.2 Phase stopping and goal switching The phase variable x in (3) provides the ability to manipulate time during the execution of DMP equations. Moreover, DMP provides the ability to slow-down or even stop the execution through the phase-stopping mechanism (Ijspeert et al. 2002c) τ ˙x =− αxx 1 +αyx||˜y−y|| (11) Moreover, DMPs provide an elegant way to adapt the trajectory generation in real-time through goal switching mechanisms (Ijspeert et al. 2013) τ ˙g =αg(g0−g) (12) DMPs in its standard formulation are not suitable for direct encoding of skills with speciﬁc geometry constraints, such as orientation proﬁles (represented in either unit quaternions or rotation matrices), stiffness/damping and manipulability proﬁles (encapsulated in full SPD matrices). For instance, direct integration of unit quaternions, does not ensure the unity of the quaternions norm. Any representation of orientation that does not contain singularities is non- minimal, which means that additional constraints need to be taken into account during integration. 2.1.1.3 Alternative phase variables Equation (3) describes an exponential decaying phase variable that has been widely used in the DMP literature. The main drawback of the exponential decaying phase is that it rapidly drops to very small values towards the end of the motion. This Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 7 “forces” the learning algorithm to exploit relatively high weights wi to accurately reproduce the last part of the demonstration (Samant et al. 2016). As an example, in Figure 3 the exponential decaying phase (brown dot-dashed line) is very small already after 0.6 s, while the expected time duration of the motion isT = 1 s. To overcome this limitation, Kulvicius et al. (2011) propose the sigmoidal decay phase s (green solid line in Figure 3), obtained by integrating ˙s =− αse(αs/δt)(τT−t) [1 +e(αs/δt)(τT−t)]2, (13) whereαs deﬁnes the steepness ofs centered at time T and δt is the sampling time. As shown in Figure 3, s = 1 for t 0 denotes a small constant. The function Expq(·) : R3↦→ S3 is given Expq(ω) =    cos(||ω||) + sin(||ω||) ω ||ω||, ω̸= 0 1 + [0 0 0]⊤, otherwise. (19) Both mappings become one-to-one, continuously differ- entiable and inverse to each other if the input domain of the mapping Logq(·) is restricted toS3 except for−1 + [0 0 0]⊤, while the input domain of the mapping Exp q(ω) should fulﬁll the constraint||ω|| 0 generate topologically equivalent trajectories (Ijspeert et al. 2013). Using a simple modiﬁcation of the transformation system, namely substituting (1) with τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y)−z) + (g−y0)f(x), (42) Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 11 Ijspeert et al. (2013) show that DMP are also scale invariant, meaning that the scaling of the movement amplitude ς(g−y0) with ς >0 generates topologically equivalent trajectories. The purpose of the green color used in (42) is to highlight differences w.r.t. (1). Apart from generating scaled—in time and space—versions of the demonstrated motion trajectory, classical DMPs also generalize to different initial/target states. However, the classical formulation—and its extension in (42)—may exhibit dangerous behaviors like over-ampliﬁcation of the trajectory when reaching a different target and high accelerations when switching to a different target on-line (Pastor et al. 2009; Ijspeert et al. 2013). To alleviate the second issue, Ijspeert et al. (2013) replaced hard goal switches with the smooth switching law as in (12). However, the over-ampliﬁcation issue still remains. Moreover, a DMP that uses (42) fails to learn motions with the same initial and target states ( i.e., g =y0,z 0 = 0→ y(t) =y0 =g∀t). In order to remedy those issues, Pastor et al. (2009) proposed to modify the transformation system as τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y−(g−y0)x +f(x))−z), (43) where the green color is used to highlight differences between (43) and (1). The most important change in this formulation is the term (g−y0)x that has several beneﬁts. It prevents high accelerations at the beginning of the motion (g−y− (g−y0)x = 0 for t = 0) or when the goal is close to the initial state. It allows to reproduce motions with the same initial and target states and it prevents over-ampliﬁcations and trajectory mirroring effects * when changing the goal. Hoffmann et al. (2009) derived a multidimensional representation of (43) from the behavior of the spinal force ﬁelds in frogs. The goal can also change over time and, in this case, the tracking performance of the DMP mostly depends on the gains αz and βz. As proposed by (Koutras and Doulgeri 2020b), the tracking performance can be improved by adapting the temporal scalingτ. Dragan et al. (2015) showed that DMPs solve a trajectory optimization problem in order to minimize a particular Hilbert norm between the demonstration and the new trajectory subject to start and goal constraints. In this light, DMP adaptation capabilities to different start and goals can be improved by choosing (or learning) a proper Hilbert norm that reduces the deformation in the retrieved trajectory. 3.1.2 Via-points A via-point can be deﬁned as a point in the state space where the trajectory has to pass. Failing to pass a via-point may cause the robot to fail the task execution. Therefore, having a motion primitive representation with the capability of modulating the via-points is of importance in robotic scenarios. It is not surprising that researchers have extended the DMP formulation to consider intermediate via-points in the trajectory generation process. Ning et al. (2011, 2012) extend the classical DMP to satisfy position and velocity constraints at the beginning and at the end of a sample trajectory. Their approach to traverse via-points consists of creating a sample trajectory by combining locally-linear trajectories connecting the via- points. This sample trajectory is used to ﬁt a DMP that is constrained to pass the via-points. Weitschat and Aschemann (2018) considered each via- point as an intermediate goal (via-goal)gv forv = 1,...,V to reach. The last via-goalgV corresponded to the target state of the DMP. In their formulation, they deﬁned a variable goal as gvia(x) = V∑ v=1 Ψv(x)gv, (44) where Ψv(x) are the Gaussian basis function centered at the time corresponding to the v−th via-goal. The effectiveness of the approach is demonstrated in a task were the robot has to reach a different target while preventing possible self- collisions of the end-effector with the robot body. To this end, authors place the via-goals along the trajectory used to learn the DMP, forcing the generated trajectory to stay close to the demonstration while reaching the new target. The problem of generalizing to via-point close (interpo- lation) and far (extrapolation) from the demonstration is faced by (Zhou et al. 2019). Their approach, namely Via- points Movement Primitives (VMPs) , combines the beneﬁts of DMP and Probabilistic Movement Primitivess (ProMPs) (Paraschos et al. 2013). Authors assumed that the motion trajectory is generated as yvmp(x) =e(x) +fvmp(x), (45) where x is the phase variable deﬁned as in (3) and the elementary trajectory e(x) can be deﬁned as the linear attractor e(x) = (y0−g)x. The shape modulation term fvmp(x) is deﬁned as fvmp(x) = N∑ i=1 wiΨi(x) +ϵf (46) where the Gaussian kernels Ψi(x) are deﬁned as in (5), wi are learnable weights, and ϵf is the Gaussian noise. As detailed in (Paraschos et al. 2013), learning the shape modulation term fvmp(x) means Learning from Demonstrations (LfDs) the prior probability distribution of the weights wi. Having separated the generated trajectory into two parts like in (45) allows to adopt different strategies to pass a via-point yv atxv. Zhou et al. (2019) proposed to modify the shape modulation term for interpolation cases– when the via-point is “close” to the demonstrations. In extrapolation cases, instead, the elementary trajectorye(x) is rewritten as the polygonal line connectingy0,yv, andg. This approach easily generalizes to the case of multiple via-points. VMPs are experimentally compared with ProMPs, showing better performance especially in extrapolation cases. 3.1.3 Task parameters Reaching a different goal, or passing through via-points, may not be enough to successfully execute a task in a different context. Approaches presented in this section adapt the DMP ∗As discussed by (Pastor et al. 2009), a transformation system that uses (42) generates a mirrored trajectory while reaching a new goal gnew every time the signs of (gnew − y0) and (g − y0) differ. Prepared using sagej.cls 12 Journal Title XX(X) 0 5 10 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (a) Position 0.8 -0.8 0 0 5 10 Time [s] [m/s] (b) Linear Velocity 0.06 -0.06 0 4.6 4.7 4.8 Time [s] [m/s] (c) Linear Velocity 0 5 10 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (d) Goal Switch 0.005 0 0.01 0 5 10 Time [s] [m] (e) Position Error 0.8 -0.8 0 0 5 10 Time [s] (f) Quaternion [rad/s] 2.5 -2.5 0 0 5 10 Time [s] (g) Angular Velocity 0.06 -0.06 0 4.6 4.7 4.8 Time [s] [rad/s] (h) Angular Velocity 0.6 -1 -0.2 0 5 10 Time [s] (i) Goal Switch 0 5 10 Time [s] 0.007 0 0.014 [rad] (j) Orientation Error Figure 8. Results obtained by applying the zero velocity switch approach to join two DMPs trained on synthetic data. The training trajectory for the position and the orientation are shown as a black dashed lines in (a)-(b) and (f)-(g) respectively. Results are obtained with the open source implementation available at https://gitlab.com/dmp-codes-collection. motion to new situations by adjusting the weights wi of the forcing term (4), that modiﬁes the entire DMP trajectory. Weitschat et al. (2013) considered that L demonstrations are given, each encoded in a different DMP. In order to generalize, for instance, to a new goal gnew, they proposed to interpolate the weights of nearby DMPs, i.e., DMPs that reached points aroundgnew. In formulas wnew = ∑ ∀o:do<dmax wod−1 o ∑ ∀o:do<dmax d−1o , (47) where o represents the indices of the nearby DMPs for which it holds that do <d max. do is the distance (or, more generally, a cost) between gnew and go, dmax is the maximum distance to consider 2 DMPs close. wnew = [w1,new,··· ,wN,new]⊤ and wo = [w1,o,··· ,wN,o]⊤ are the new weights and the weight of nearby DMPs, respectively. The approach by Forte et al. (2011, 2012) also assumes thatL demonstrations are given and that each demonstration is encoded in a different DMP. Further, the authors exploited GP (Rasmussen and Williams 2006) to learn a mapping between the query points ql for l = 1,...,L (e.g., the goal of each DMP) and the DMP parameters [wl,gl,τl]. Given the new query point qnew, Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) (Rasmussen and Williams 2006) is used to retrieve the new set of parameters [wnew,gnew,τnew], that can be used to generate a DMP motion. This approach builds on previous work (Gams and Ude 2009; Ude et al. 2010) where raw data from the L demonstrations are stored in memory and LWR is used to generate new DMP weights. Alizadeh et al. (2016) extend the approach in (Ude et al. 2010) to retrieve the DMP weights even when the task parameters are partially observable. Finally, (Zhou and Asfour 2017) extend the approach in (Ude et al. 2010) to consider task-speciﬁc costs while learning the mapping between query points and DMP weights. Aforementioned approaches follow a 2-steps procedure where ﬁrst the shape parameters w are estimated given new task parameters and then execute the DMP. Matsubara et al. (2010, 2011) augmented the forcing term with a style parameter used to capture human variability across multiple demonstrations. Stulp et al. (2013) proposed a 1-step procedure where the DMP forcing term (4) is reformulated to explicitly depend on the task parameters. Their experiments shows that a 1-step approach gives more freedom w.r.t.the used regression technique and increase the generalization performance. Along the same line, Pervez and Lee (2018) embedded task parameters directly in the forcing term. Authors proposed to use a mixture of Gaussians (Cohn et al. 1996) to learn the mapping between the task parameters (e.g., new goal, height of an obstacle, etc) and the forcing term. Given a new query task parameter, regression over the mixture of Gaussians is used to retrieve the forcing term parameters and generate the DMP motion. The approach is tested on a variety of tasks including sweeping and stricking and additionally compared with the approaches presented by (Ude et al. 2010; Forte et al. 2012; Stulp et al. 2013) showing better performance especially in extrapolation. A Mixture of Motor Primitives (MoMP) is proposed in (M¨ulling et al. 2010, 2013) and used to generalize table tennis skills like hitting and batting a ball. MoMP uses an augmented state that contains robot position and velocity as well as the meta-parameters of the table tennis task like the expected hitting position and velocity. The adapted motion is generated by the weighted summation ofL DMPs and the responsibility of each DMP, representing the probability that a particular DMP is the correct one for the sensed augmented state, is also learned from data. In high DoF systems, like humanoid robots, it is non trivial to ﬁnd a relationship between the task and the DMP parameters. This is especially true when the DMPs are used to encode joint space trajectories. Bitzer and Vijayakumar (2009) showed that such a relationship is easier to ﬁnd in a latent (lower dimensional) space obtained from training data. Therefore, they used dimensionality reduction techniques to ﬁnd the latent space where to ﬁt a DMP and show that Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 13 interpolation of DMP weights in the latent space results in better generalization performance. 3.2 Joining multiple DMPs An important and desired feature of any motion primitive representation is the possibility to combine basic movements to obtain more complex behaviors (Schaal 1999). We review here three prominent approaches developed to smoothly join a sequence of DMPs. In this tutorial, we name the approach by Pastor et al. (2009) as velocity threshold, that in (Kober et al. 2010b) as target crossing , and that in (Kulvicius et al. 2011, 2012) as basis functions overlay . Some of the presented approaches modify the DMP formulations in Section 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. The main differences are highlighted with green text. The 3 approaches have been implemented in Matlab for both position (Section 2.1.1) and orientation (Section 2.1.2) DMPs. The source code is included in our public repository (see Table 4). Results on synthetic data are shown in Figures 8 to 11. 3.2.1 Velocity threshold A properly designed DMP reaches the desired target with zero velocity and acceleration, i.e., once a DMP is fully executed the robot comes to a full stop. This also implies that the velocity “close” to the target is continuously decreasing. Using this property, Pastor et al. (2009) propose to combine successive DMPs by simply terminating the current DMP when the velocity is below a certain threshold and then starting the following primitive. When executing a single DMP, it is common practice to initialize its velocity to zero—the robot is assumed to be still. In principle, this initialization can be used to sequence multiple DMPs (Xu and Wang 2004; Lioutikov et al. 2016), but it may generate discontinuities if the robot does not fully stop in between two consecutive primitives. To prevent this discontinuities, Pastor et al. initialized the state of the current DMP with that of the previous one. The velocity threshold approach is simple and effective since it directly applies to the DMP formulations in Sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. For instance, Saveriano et al. (2019) showed how to join multiple quaternion DMPs † (see Section 2.1.2.1) with the velocity threshold approach. Results in Figure 8 are obtained when velocity threshold is applied to merge 2 DMPs separately trained to ﬁt minimum jerk trajectories (black dashed lines). Figures 8a–8e show the position and Figures 8f–8j the orientation (unit quaternion) parts of the motion. The merged trajectory is generated by following the ﬁrst DMP until the distance from the via-point is below 0.01 [m] and 0.01 [rad]. As shown in Figures 8d and 8i, the switch occurs after about 4.7 [s]. Figures 8e and 8j shows that the desired trajectory is accurately reproduced. More or less accurate trajectories can be obtained by tuning the distance from the via- point. However, the value of this distance the time duration of the generated trajectory—a bigger (smaller) distance results in a shorter (longer) trajectory. For instance, in the considered case, the total motion ends after 9.5 [s] while the demonstration lasts for 10 [s]. Depending on the application, the time difference may cause failures, therefore, it has to be taken into account. Finally, the velocity threshold approach may generate discontinuities if the target of the current DMP 0.5 1 0 0 0.6 1.2 moving targetdelayed goal Time [s] 0 0.6 1.2 Time [s] constant goal 0.5 0 1 [m] Figure 9. The constant goal, moving target, and delayed goal obtained obtained withy(0) = 0 [m],g = 1 [m], ˙ˆy = 0.3 [m/s] (left), and q(0) = 1 + [0, 0, 0]⊤, gq = 0 + [1, 0, 0]⊤, ˆω = [0.2, 0.2, 0.2]⊤[rad/s] (right). The sampling time is δt = 0.01 [s]. Only the scalar part ν of the quaternion is shown for a better visualization. is far from the demonstrated initial point of the following primitive. 3.2.2 Target crossing There exist movements like hitting or batting that are correctly executed only if the target is reached with a non- zero velocity. To this end, Kober et al. (2010b) extend the classical DMP formulation in Section 2.1.1 to let the DMP to track a target moving at a given velocity. In their approach, the DMP passes the target with a given velocity exactly after T seconds. To achieve this, the acceleration in (1) is re- written as τ ˙z = (1−x)αz ( βz(ˆg−y)+τ( ˙ˆy− ˙y) ) +f(x), (48) where ˙ˆym is the desired velocity of the moving target ˆg, which is deﬁned as ˆg = ˆg(0)− ˙ˆyτln(x) αx , (49) ˆg(0) =g− T ˙ˆy τ . (50) By inspecting (49) and (50), and considering that the term −τ ln(x)/αx represents the elapsed time if x is the phase deﬁned in (3), it is possible to show that the moving targetˆg is designed to reach the goalg afterT seconds, i.e., ˆg(T ) =g (Fig. 9-left). The initial position of the moving target ˆg(0) is obtained by moving the goal position g forT seconds at constant velocity− ˙ˆy. High accelerations at the beginning of the movement are avoided by the pre-factor(1−x) which is set to zero at the beginning of the motion ( x(0) = 1). The approach by Nemec and Ude (2012) combines a moving target and a particular initialization of the subsequent DMP to ensure continuity of the movement up to second-order derivatives. Saveriano et al. (2019) extended this idea to quaternion DMP. The angular acceleration in (15) is modiﬁed as τ ˙η =(1−x)αz(βz2 Logq(ˆgq∗ q)+τ(ˆω−ω) + fq(x), (51) †Saveriano et al. used the multi-dimensional DMP formulation developed in (Hoffmann et al. 2009) for both position and quaternion DMPs. In this review paper, we reformulate the merging approaches in (Saveriano et al. 2019) to comply with the formulations in Section 2.1.1 and 2.1.2.1. Prepared using sagej.cls 14 Journal Title XX(X) 0 5 10 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (a) Position 0.8 -0.8 0 0 5 10 Time [s] [m/s] (b) Linear Velocity 0.02 -0.02 0 4.8 5 5.2 Time [s] [m/s] (c) Linear Velocity 0 5 10 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (d) Goal Switch 0.03 0 0.06 0 5 10 Time [s] [m] (e) Position Error 0.8 -0.8 0 0 5 10 Time [s] (f) Quaternion 2.5 -2.5 0 0 5 10 Time [s] [rad/s] (g) Angular Velocity 0.02 -0.02 0 4.8 5 5.2 Time [s] [rad/s] (h) Angular Velocity 0.6 -1 -0.2 0 5 10 Time [s] (i) Goal Switch 0 5 10 Time [s] 0.16 0 0.32 [rad] (j) Orientation Error Figure 10. Results obtained by applying the target crossing approach to join two DMPs trained on synthetic data. The training trajectory for the position and the orientation are shown as a black dashed lines in (a)-(b) and (f)-(g) respectively. Results are obtained with the open source implementation available at https://gitlab.com/dmp-codes-collection. where ˆω is the angular velocity of the moving quaternion target ˆgq and 2 Logq(ˆgq∗ q) measures the error between the current orientation q and ˆgq. The pre-factor (1−x) is used to avoid high angular accelerations at the beginning of the motion. The moving target for the quaternion DMPs is deﬁned as ˆgq = Expq ( −τ ln(x) 2αx ˆω ) ∗ ˆgq(0), ˆgq(0) = Expq ( −T 2 ˆω ) ∗ gq, (52) where gq is the goal quaternion,T is the time duration of the DMP, and the exponential map Exp q(·) is deﬁned in (19). As shown in Figure 9- right, the moving target ˆgq reaches the goal orientation after T seconds, i.e., ˆgq(T ) = gq. This can be easily veriﬁed by considering that the initial value of the moving target ˆgq(0) is computed by moving the goal orientation gq forT seconds at the desired velocity−ˆω. The presented target crossingapproach allows to cross the target after T seconds. Assuming to have two DMPs with time duration T 1 andT 2 respectively, one can join them by running the ﬁrst DMP for T 1 seconds and then switching to the second one. As for the velocity threshold approach, possible discontinuities at the switching point are prevented by initializing the state of DMP2 with the ﬁnal state of DMP1. This procedure can be repeated to join L≥ 2 consecutive DMPs. Results in Figure 10 are obtained when the velocity threshold is applied for merging 2 separately trained DMPs to ﬁt the minimum jerk trajectories (black dashed lines). Figures 10a–10e show the position and Figures 10f–10j the orientation (unit quaternion) parts of the motion. The merged trajectory is generated by following the ﬁrst DMP for T 1 = 5 s and then switch to the second one. The required intermediate velocity is set to 0.01 m/s (rad/s for the orientation) in each direction. The generated trajectory reaches the goal in 10 s, i.e., demonstration and execution times are the same. As required, the via- point is crossed at T = 5 s with the desired velocity (Fig. 10c and 10h). However, the non-zero crossing velocity introduce a deformation in the ﬁrst part of the trajectory (Fig. 10e and 10j). 3.2.3 Basis functions overlay The approach by Kulvicius et al. (2011, 2012) combines multiple DMPs into a complex one, guaranteeing a smooth transition between the primitives by ensuring that the basis functions composing f(x) in (4) overlap at the switching instances. First of all, Kulvicius et al. adopted a sigmoidal phase variable in (13) instead of the exponentially decaying one (3). As discussed in Section 2.1.1.3, the sigmoidal phase is≈ 1 for the large part of the motion which makes it possible to use smaller forcing terms to reproduce the demonstrations. On the contrary, the exponential phase is close to zero already before T s (Fig. 3), which results in larger forcing terms. The classical acceleration dynamics in (1) is modiﬁed as τ ˙z =αz(βz(˜g−y)−z) +f(s), (53) Similarly to target crossing, Kulvicius et al. used a moving target ˜g in the acceleration dynamics, but called it thedelayed goal function. The ˜g term in (53) is obtained by integrating τ ˙˜g = { δt T (g−y0), t ≤T 0, otherwise (54) with ˜g(0) =y0. The delayed goal function in Figure 9 moves linearly fromy0 tog inT seconds and then remains constant, i.e., ˜g(t≥T ) =g. The non-linear forcing term f(s) is in green in (53) because it slightly differs from the classical one in (4). f(s) is deﬁned as f(s) = ∑N i=1wiΨi(t) ∑N i=1 Ψi(t) s, Ψi(t) = exp ( −( t τT −ci)2 2σ2 i ) , (55) Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 15 0 6 12 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (a) Position 0.8 -0.8 0 0 6 12 Time [s] [m/s] (b) Linear Velocity 0.03 -0.03 0 4.8 5 5.2 Time [s] [m/s] (c) Linear Velocity 0 6 12 Time [s] 1.5 0.5 -0.5 [m] (d) Goal Switch 0.015 0 0.03 0 6 12 Time [s] [m] (e) Position Error 0.8 -0.8 0 0 6 12 Time [s] (f) Quaternion 2.5 -2.5 0 0 6 12 Time [s] [rad/s] (g) Angular Velocity 0.03 -0.03 0 4.8 5 5.2 Time [s] [rad/s] (h) Angular Velocity 0.8 -0.8 0 0 6 12 Time [s] (i) Goal Switch 0 6 12 Time [s] 0.04 0 0.08 [rad] (j) Orientation Error Figure 11. Results obtained by applying the basis functions overlay approach to join two DMPs trained on synthetic data. The training trajectory for the position and the orientation are shown as a black dashed lines in (a)-(b) and (f)-(g) respectively. Results are obtained with the open source implementation available at https://gitlab.com/dmp-codes-collection. where σi is the width and ci is the center of the i-th basis function, and s is obtained by integrating (13). The term t/τT is used in (55) instead of the the phase variable x. Being 0≤t/τT ≤ 1, the basis functions are equally spaced between 0 and 1. Finally, σi are the widths of each kernel. They are constant and depend on the number of kernels. Having presented the main differences with the canonical approach, it is possible to focus on how Kulvicius et al. (2012) solved the problem of joining L≥ 2 DMPs. In general, each of the L DMPs has a different time duration Tl, desired targetgl, and initial positionyl 0, from which it is possible to compute the delayed goal functions by integrating τ ˙˜gl =    δt T l (gl−yl 0), l−1∑ κ=1 Tκ≤t≤ l∑ κ=1 Tκ 0, otherwise . (56) Note that, being ˜gl(0) =y0, the acceleration (53) is smooth at the beginning of the motion. For this reason, the term (1−x) used in (48) is not needed in (53). Assuming that L DMPs have been trained and that each DMP has N kernels, we can merge them into one DMP as follows. The centers of the joined DMP are computed as ˇcl i =    T 1(i−1) Tjoin(N−1), l = 1 T l(i−1) Tjoin(N−1) + 1 Tjoin l−1∑ κ=1 Tκ, otherwise , (57) where Tl is the duration of the l-th DMP, and Tjoin =∑L l=1Tl (duration of the joined motion). The widths of the joined DMP are computed as ˇσl i = σl iTl Tjoin . (58) The centers and widths computed in (57) and (58) respectively overlap at the transition points allowing for smooth transitions between consecutive DMPs. The weights of the joined DMP are obtained by stacking theN weights of theL DMPs. Therefore, the joined DMP has N∗L kernels and N∗L weights. The phase variable (13) is modiﬁed to run for the durationTjoin of the joint motion. Saveriano et al. (2019) extended the basis functions overlay approach to quaternion DMPs. Assuming that a sequence of L quaternion DMPs is given. The angular acceleration in (15) is reformulated for each DMP as τ ˙ηl =αz(βz2 Logq(˜gl q∗ ql)−ηl) + fl q(s) (59) where l indicates the l-th quaternion DMP and fl q(s) is deﬁned as in (55). The term ˜gl q is the quaternion delayed goal function and it ranges from ql(0) to gl q inTl seconds (see Fig. 9 (right)). To generate this moving target while preserving the geometry of S3 it is needed that ˜gl q moves along the geodesic connecting ql(0) to gl q. Therefore, ˜gl q is deﬁned as ˜gl q(t +δt) = Expq ( τ ˜ωl(t) 2 ) ∗ ˜gl q(t) (60) where ˜ωl(t) =    2 T l Logq ( gl q∗ ql(0) ) l−1∑ κ=1 Tκ≤t≤ l∑ k=1 Tκ [0, 0, 0]⊤, otherwise . (61) The angular velocity in (61) is computed for each l. The term 2Logq ( gl q∗ ql(0) ) represent the angular velocity that rotates ql(0) into gl q in a unit time. Note, that the mappings Logq(·) and Expq(·) are deﬁned in (17) and (19) respectively. The delayed goal ˜gl q crosses all the via-goals gl q, l= 1,...,L − 1 and then reaches the goal gL q . Results in Figure 11 are obtained when velocity threshold is applied to merge 2 DMPs separately trained to ﬁt the minimum jerk trajectories (black dashed lines). Figures 11a– 11e show the position and Figures 11f–11j the orientation (unit quaternion) parts of the motion. This approach does not require a switching rule and automatically generates a smooth trajectory—with continuous velocity as shown Prepared using sagej.cls 16 Journal Title XX(X) in Figures 11c and 11h—that passes close to the via- point which favors the overall reproduction accuracy (Fig. 11e and 11j). However, the distance from the via-point depends on the weights of the joined primitives and cannot be separately decided. The trajectory generated with this approach tend to last longer than the demonstrations. This is due to the sigmoidal phase that vanishes after T +δs s (Fig. 3). Depending on the application, the time difference may cause failures and has to be taken into account. 3.3 Online adaptation The standard periodic DMP learning approach approximates the shapefd(t) of the input trajectoryyd in (38) by changing the weights of the Gaussian kernel functions (Ijspeert et al. 2013). Updating of the weights is performed in such a way that the difference between the reference trajectory and the DMP is reduced at every control step and gradually throughout the periodic repetitions. However, the DMP can also be reshaped by some external feedback function to achieve different functionalities for different applications, for instance, tasks that require trail-and-error approach (Kober et al. 2008), obstacle avoidance (Park et al. 2008; Hoffmann et al. 2009; Tan et al. 2011), coaching (Petri ˇc et al. 2014b; Gams et al. 2016) for robots, and adaptation of assistive exoskeleton behavior (Peternel et al. 2016a). Alternatively, the frequency of the existing periodic DMPs can be modulated online (Gams et al. 2009; Petri ˇc et al. 2011). 3.3.1 Robot obstacle avoidance and coaching In (Park et al. 2008; Hoffmann et al. 2009; Tan et al. 2011) the detected obstacle was ﬁtted with a potential ﬁeld function to change the shape of the DMP to avoid it. More in details, Tan et al. (2011) used the potential ﬁeld to compute a time- varying goal and modiﬁed the resulting DMP trajectory, while (Park et al. 2008; Hoffmann et al. 2009) added and extra forcing term to the DMP. Similarly in (Gams et al. 2016) the human arm was ﬁtted with a potential ﬁeld function, which was used to reshape the DMP to perform coaching. The potential ﬁeld was coupled to the position of the human hand to make pointing gestures and indicate the direction in which the robot arm position trajectory should change: ˙z = Ω (α (β (−y)−z) +CO +f). (62) The added coupling term CO is the obstacle avoidance term that contains the potential ﬁeld and is given in a simpliﬁed form for the sake of explanation as: CO =ds(||O− y||) exp(−ζ(O− y)), (63) whereO is the obstacle (or human pointing gesture) and y is the robot position. Exponential and ζ functions determine the potential ﬁeld, while functionds controls the distance at which the perturbation ﬁeld should start affecting the DMP. For the full formulation ofCO and its parameters, see (Gams et al. 2016). In (Rai et al. 2017) the method was extended to include generalization of the obstacle avoidance formulation in (62). Alternatively, the faulty segment of collision DMP trajectory can also be directly adjusted online by the human demonstrator (Karlsson et al. 2017). On the other hand, the method in (Kim et al. 2015) considers obstacle avoidance as a constraint of an optimization problem, which modiﬁes the DMP trajectory to prevent collisions. 3.3.2 Robot adaptation based on force feedback Similarly as for obstacle avoidance, task dynamics can also be incorporated into DMP as coupling terms. In (Gams et al. 2014) task dynamics were coupled on the acceleration and velocity level of the DMP. The presented method was utilized for interaction tasks, where the human changed the behavior of the robot based on the exerted dynamics on the manipulator. τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y)−z) + ˙Cf +f(x), (64) τ ˙y =z +Cf. (65) whereas the force coupling term Cf =ςF is deﬁned as a virtual or measured force F and ς is a scaling factor, which essentially changes the dynamic behavior of the DMP, enabling the motion primitive to instantly react to the coupled force. Later, Zhou et al. (2016b) introduced a PD controller based coupling term formulation CPD = ς(KP(Fd−Fe)−DV ˙Fe) coupled to the velocity part of the DMP (65). In the formulation Fd represents the desired force, Fe is the measured force, ς is a scaling factor and KP andDV are the proportional and derivative gains of the Proportional Derivative (PD) controller. The coupling term formulation allows for controlled adaptation of robot motion to changes in the environment. In (Kramberger et al. 2018) this approach was extended, with a force feedback loop coupled to the velocity (2) and the goalg of the DMP. The outcome of this approach is a similar behavior as an admittance controller (Villani and De Schutter 2008), with an difference that the execution is directly on the trajectory generation level. τ ˙z =αz(βz((g +Ca)−y)−z) +f(x), (66) τ ˙y =z + ˙Ca. (67) Here ˙Ca =ς(Fd−Fe) is the ﬁrst time-derivative of the admittance coupling term, which changes the velocity and consequently the integrated coupling term, the position output of the DMP. The described approach can be used for Cartesian space motion, where the forces have to be substituted for desired and measured torques. This approach can be implemented in robot tasks involving contact with the environment as well as contact with humans. 3.3.3 Exoskeleton joint torque adaptation In (Peternel et al. 2016a), human effort was used to provide the information about the direction in which the assistive exoskeleton joint torque DMP should change in order to minimize it. The human was included into the robot control loop by replacing the error calculation in (40) with the human effort feedback termU(E): wi(t+1) =wi(t) + ΨiPi(t+1)U(E), (68) where E(t) is the current effort measured by human muscle activity through Electromyography (EMG) signals ‡ . ‡Note that other feedback that measures human effort can be used instead of EMG, such as joint torque or limb forces. Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 17 Equations (33)-(37) and (41) are used in the original form. Equations (38)-(40) are not used, since (68) is used to modulate the weights in (36) instead. The effort feedback termU(E) closes the loop and acts as a feedback for adapting the weights of Gaussian kernels that deﬁne the shape of the trajectory. A positiveU(E) increases, while a negative U(E) decreases the values of weights at a given section of the periodic DMP that encodes joint torque. If the shape of the DMP does not provide enough assistive power, the human has to exert effort (i.e., muscle activity) to produce the rest of the power required to achieve the desired task under given dynamics. In turn, muscle activity feedback then increases the magnitude of the DMP until the human effort term U(E) is minimised. Note that each joint has its own torque DMP and U(E) term (Peternel et al. 2016a). After that point, the DMPs do not change unless the task, dynamics or conditions change. If they change, the human has to compensate for the change by an additional muscle activity, which in turn adapts the DMPs to the new required joint torques. 3.3.4 Trajectory adaptation based on reference velocity In many LfD scenarios it is desired to modify both the spatial motion and the speed of the learned motion at any stage of the execution. Speed-scaled dynamic motion primitives ﬁrst presented in Nemec et al. (2013a) are applied for the underlying task representation. The original DMP formulation from (1) and (2) were extended by adding a temporal scaling factorυ on the velocity level of the DMP υ(x)τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y)−z) +f(x), (69) υ(x)τ ˙y =z. (70) Form (69) and (70), it is evident that the velocity term is a function of phase, and therefore encoded with a set of RBFs similarly as in (4). This method allows for modiﬁcation of the spacial motion as well as the speed of the execution at any stage of the trajectory execution. The authors demonstrated the proposed method in a learning scenario, where after every learning cycle (using Iterative Learning Control (ILC)) a new velocity proﬁle was encoded based on the wrench feedback, and thus converged to an optimal velocity for the speciﬁc task. Vuga et al. (2016) extended the approach by incorporating a compact representation for non-uniformly accelerated motion as well as simple modulation of the movement parameters. Later on, in Nemec et al. (2018) the authors extended the previous approach to also incorporate velocity scaling of the encoded orientation trajectories represented with unit quaternions. The outcome of the presented work is a uniﬁed approach to velocity scaling for tasks executed in Cartesian space. Furthermore, a reformulation of the velocity approach called AL-DMPs was presented by Ga ˇspar et al. (2018). In this work they present a method, where the spatial and temporal components of the motion are separated, by means of the arc-lenght based on the time parameterized trajectory. Arc-lenght, based on the differential geometry of curves, is related to the speed of the movement, given as the time derivative of the demonstrated trajectory. The approach is well suited when multiple demonstrations are compared for extraction of relevant information for learning. Weitschat and Aschemann (2018) add an extra forcing term to keep the velocity within a certain predeﬁned limit. The aim of this work is to guaranty a safe execution of the robot task when interacting with humans, as well as providing a framework for safe interaction in a changing environment where the robot position and velocity have to change over time. For a full formulation of the coupling term see (Weitschat and Aschemann 2018). Additionally, Dahlin and Karayiannidis (2020) in their work proposed a temporal coupling based on a repulsive potential, keeping the DMP velocity within the predeﬁned velocity limits while ensuring the path shape invariance. 3.4 Alternative formulations LfD is a wide research area and many different approaches have been developed to reproduce human demonstrations (Billard et al. 2016). As already mentioned, the aim of this tutorial survey is to provide a comprehensive overview of DMPs research and we intentionally skip the rich literature in the ﬁeld of LfD. However, we found some representations that are closely related to the DMP formulation. This section brieﬂy reviews them. Calinon et al. (2009) computed an acceleration command for the robot in a PD-like form ¨ y= KP(yd− y) + DV(˙ yd− ˙ y), where KP is a stiffness and DV a damping gain, y is the measured state of the robot and ˙ yits time derivative (velocity), yd and ˙ yd are desired position and velocity retrieved with GMR. Authors then shown that the acceleration command ¨ ycan be seen as a mixture of linear dynamics, each converging to a certain attractor. Despite later work like (Kormushev et al. 2010) referred to this representation as “a modiﬁed version” of DMPs there are signiﬁcant differences with the DMP formulation properly highlighted by (Calinon et al. 2012). Herzog et al. (2016) computed an acceleration command for the robot from the linear system ¨ y= u = KP(yd− y), where y is the measured state of the robot, yd is a human demonstration, and KP is a control gain computed using the linear-quadratic regulator method. Then, a compact representation of the control input trajectory u is computed by means of Chebyshev polynomials. This representation does not require a vanishing phase variable to ensure convergence, but the generalization to different start/goal position requires the application of the linear-quadratic regulator method to ﬁnd a new sequence of control inputs. Regarding periodic motions, (Ajallooeian et al. 2013) proposed a dynamical system-based framework to learn rhythmic movements with an arbitrary shape and basin of attraction. They exploit phase-based scaling functions to represent the mapping between a known, base limit cycle and a desired periodic orbit. The basic limit cycle can be, for example, the one generated by a periodic DMPs, which makes the approach of (Ajallooeian et al. 2013) a more general formulation of periodic primitives. Prepared using sagej.cls 18 Journal Title XX(X) 4 DMPs integration in complex frameworks This section reviews approaches where DMPs have been integrated into bigger executive frameworks. We categorize these approaches into ﬁve main research areas, namely grasping and manipulation , impedance learning , reinforcement learning, deep learning, and incremental and life-long learning 4.1 Manipulation tasks Successfully grasping an object is the ﬁrst step towards robotic manipulation. Performing a grasping requires a (visual) perception of the environment to locate the object to grasp and decide the grasping points based on its geometry. In this setting, even small uncertainties may cause the object to drop and the grasp to fail. To improve the robustness of vision driven grasping, Kr ¨omer et al. (2010a) augmented DMPs with a potential ﬁeld based on visual descriptors that adapts hand and ﬁnger trajectories to the object’s local geometry. This grasping strategy was integrated in a hierarchical control architecture where the upper level decides where to grasp the object and the lower level locally adapted the motion to robustly grasp the object (Kr ¨omer et al. 2010b). Stein et al. (2014) proposed a point cloud segmentation approach based on convexity and concavity of surfaces. The approach is particularly suited to recognize object handles and enables a robot to automatically grasp object. The ability of grasping and using tools is also desirable to perform daily-life manipulation. In this respect, (Guerin et al. 2014) proposed the so-called tool movement primitives that transform the demonstrations in a tool affordance frame. The result is a motion that generalize to different tool poses and to tools that share the same affordance(s). Li and Fritz (2015) considered tool usage with low-cost, non- dexterous grippers and propose a framework to learn bi- manual strategies for tool usage and compensate for the lack of dexterity. Bi-manual robotic manipulation is a challenging task that requires precise coordination between the hand movements and adherence to the spatial constrains. Thota et al. (2016) developed a DMP-based control framework for bi-manual manipulation that ensures time synchronization of the two hands while being robust to spatial perturbations and goal changes. Beyond the object grasping, everyday manipulation requires a precise execution of complex movements. Often such a complex movements are hard to encode into a single motion primitive, but they can be conveniently split into simpler motions (e.g., reach and grasp) that can be properly sequenced and executed (Fig. 12). The possibility of exploiting DMPs as the building blocks of complex tasks was investigated in (Ramirez-Amaro et al. 2015; Caccavale et al. 2018, 2019). In these works, a human teacher demonstrated a relatively complex task consisting of several actions performed on different objects. The demonstration was then automatically segmented into M basic motions used to ﬁt M DMPs. While Ramirez-Amaro et al. (2015) exploit semantic rules ( e.g., , reach an object with a knife means cut ) to infer high-level human activities, Caccavale et al. built a hierarchical structure to schedule the execution of the complex task by selecting the proper Figure 12. An example of hierarchical task decomposition and motion primitives sequencing from (Agostini et al. 2020). DMP for the current executive context. They used kinesthetic teaching and verbal cues (open/close gripper commands) to provide task demonstrations. Lemme et al. (2014) organize segmented task demonstrations into a motion primitives library learned from self-generated trajectory patches. They also introduced a mechanism to remove unused skills and update the library. Kinesthetic teaching and haptic feedback were also used by Eiband et al. (2019) to segment and recognize basic motions or skills, and to build a tree describing geometric relationships—like reference frames and goal poses—between consecutive skills. At run time, the robot performed haptic exploration to locate objects in the scene and update the skill tree. The transformations in the skill tree were then used to deﬁne initial and goal pose of the DMPs and execute the task. Finally, Wu et al. (2018) integrated DMPs into a dialogue system with speech and ontology to learn or re-learn a task using natural interaction modalities. Collecting demonstrations becomes an issue of kinesthetic teaching or marker-based motion trackers cannot be used. The latter requires an expensive sensor infrastructure that is hard to build in real world scenarios like factory ﬂoors. Kinesthetic teaching needs torque controlled/collaborative robots that are still uncommon in industrial scenarios. To remedy this issue (Mao et al. 2015) exploited a low- cost RGB-D camera and track the human hand using the markerless approach proposed by (Oikonomidis et al. 2011). Collected data were then segmented into basic motions and used to ﬁt DMPs. Described approaches assumes that human teachers always provide consistent and noiseless task demonstrations. Ghalamzan E. et al. (2015) encoded noisy demonstrations into a GMM and computed a noise free trajectory using GMR. The noise free trajectory was then used to ﬁt a DMP that generalized to different start, goal, and obstacle conﬁgurations. Niekum et al. (2012, 2015) designed a framework that learns from from unstructured demonstrations by segmenting the task demonstrations, recognizing similar skills, and generalizing the task execution. Interestingly, a user study on 10 volunteers conducted by (Gutzeit et al. 2018) showed that existing Prepared using sagej.cls Saveriano, Abu-Dakka, Kramberger, and Peternel 19 strategies for segmentation and learning are sufﬁciently robust to enable automatic transfer of manipulation skills from humans to robots in a reasonable time. Finally, some work (Deni ˇsa and Ude 2013a,b; Deni ˇsa and Ude 2015) exploited transition graphs and trees to embed parts of a trajectory and search algorithms to discover sequence of partial parts and generate motions that have not been demonstrated. Approaches that rely on a hierarchical, tree-like structure to represent the task that has limited task generalization capabilities. Lee and Suh (2013) used probabilistic inference and object affordances to infer the adequate skill that can handle uncertainties in the executive context. Beetz et al. (2010) learned stereotypical task solutions from observation and used task planning and symbolic reasoning to execute novel mobile manipulation tasks. A generative learning framework was proposed by (W ¨org¨otter et al. 2015) to augment the robot’s knowledge-base with missing information at different level of the cognitive architecture, including symbolic planning as well as object and action properties. (Paxton et al. 2016) used task and motion planning to generalize the execution of complex assembly tasks and proposed an learning by demonstration approach to ground symbolic actions. (Agostini et al. 2020) performed task and motion planning by combining an object-centric description of geometric relations between objects in the scene, a symbol to motion hierarchical decomposition depending on tree consecutive actions in the plan, and the LfD approach developed in (Caccavale et al. 2019) (Fig. 12). A manipulation task was described at three different levels by (Aein et al. 2013). The top-level provides a symbolic descriptions of actions, objects, and their relationships. The mid-level uses a ﬁnite state machine to generate a sequence of action primitives grounded by the lower level. A common point among these approaches is that they use DMP to execute the task on real robots. 4.2 Variable impedance learning control Impedance control can be used to achieve complaint motions, in which the controller resembles a virtual spring- damper system between the environment and robot end- effector (Hogan 1985). Such approach permits smooth, safe, and energy-efﬁcient interaction between robots and environments (possibly humans). A standard model for such interaction is deﬁned as M¨ yt = KP t (yg− yt)− DV t ˙ yt + fe t, (71) I ˙ωt = KO t (LogR(RgRt ⊤))− DW t ωt + τe t, (72) where (71) and (72) correspond to translational and rotational cases respectively, M, KP t , and DV t are the mass, stiffness and damping matrices, respectively, for translational motion, while I, KO t , and DW t are the moment of inertia, stiffness and damping matrices, respectively, for rotational motion. ˆR, Rt∈ SO(3) are rotation matrices and correspond to desired rotation goal and actual orientation proﬁle of the end-effector, respectively.fe t and τe t represent the external force and torque applied to the robot end- effector. In fact, VIC plays an important role when a robot needs to interact with any environment in order to avoid high Variable Impedance Learning Control (VILC) DMP Inverse Dynamics Robot and Environment Forward Kinematics Impedance Adaptation Strategy KP t M−1 t + + − ˆ y + − yt ˙ yt Qt, ˙Qt f e t DV t τ t Figure 13. General control scheme of Variable Impedance Control (VIC) and DMP. impact forces and damage for the environment or the robot ( i.e., change to low stiffness)Ajoudani et al. (2012); Abu-Dakka et al. (2018); Peternel et al. (2018a). On the other hand, it is important in rejecting unexpected and unpredictable perturbations from the environment to achieve a desired position tracking precision ( i.e., change to high stiffness) Yang et al. (2011). In addition, it is also important in coordination of human-robot collaborative movements Peternel et al. (2017b). However, a robotic system still needs to learn how to adapt such VIC to unseen situations while avoiding hard-coding. Such paradigm of learning is called Variable Impedance Learning Control (VILC). Interested readers can refer to our recent survey on VILC (Abu-Dakka and Saveriano 2020). In this review, we will mention some of the works that integrate DMP with VIC in a VILC framework. Figure 13 shows a simple generic example where DMP is integrated in a VIC control scheme. Buchli et al. (2011a) proposed one of the earliest approaches that integrates DMP with Policy Improvement with Path Integrals (PI 2) algorithm (Theodorou et al. 2010) to learn movements (position and velocity presented by DMP) while optimizing impedance parameters. Later the authors exploited a diagonal stiffness matrix and expressed the variation (time derivative) of each diagonal entry as ˙kϑj,t =αj ( ⋏j ⊤(ϑj +ϵj,t)−kϑj,t ) , j = 1,...,J, (73) where j indicates the j-th joint, kϑj,t is the stiffness of joint j, ϵj,t is a time-dependent exploration noise, each ⋏j is a vector of N Gaussian basis functions, and ϑj are the learnable parameters for joint j. The stiffness parameterization in (73) is also linear in the parameters and PI2 can be applied to ﬁnd the optimal policy. Later, authors used PI 2 to learn VIC in deterministic and stochastic force ﬁelds (Stulp et al. 2012a). Nakanishi et al. (2011) proposed a method that optimizes a periodic motion a long with a time- varying joint stiffness. (Basa and Schneider 2015) introduced an extension to DMP formulation by adding a second nonlinear function to cope with elastic robots as follow τ ˙z =αz(βz(g−y)−z) +f(x) +f2, (74) wheref2 is deﬁned as (4) but without the phase variable x. The main purpose of f2 is to compensate the gravitational inﬂuence on the moved DoF at the end of the movement time and beyond. Differently, Haddadin et al. (2016) used Prepared using sagej.cls 20 Journal Title XX(X) optimal-control to execute near-optimal motion of elastic robots. Nemec et al. (2016) proposed a cooperative control scheme that enables dual arm robot to adapt its stiffness online along to the executed trajectory in order to provide accurate evolution. (Umlauft et al. 2017) used GP along with DMPs (as proposed in (Fanger et al. 2016)) to predict the trajectories. During the execution, their admittance controller adapts both stiffness and damping online. The energy-tanks passivity-based control method has been integrated with DMPs to enforce passivity in order to stably adapt to contacts in unknown environments by adapting the stiffness online (Shahriari et al. 2017; Kramberger et al. 2018; Kastritsi et al. 2018). Methods in (Peternel et al. 2014, 2018b,a; Yang et al. 2018, 2019; Bian et al. 2019) designed different multi-modal interfaces to let the human to explicitly teach an impedance behavior to the robot. Most of them combined EMG- based variable impedance skill transfer with DMP-based motion sequence planning, inheriting the merits of these two aspects for robotic skill acquisition. Hu et al. (2018) used Covariance Matrix Adaptation-Evolution Strategies (CMA-ES) to update the parameters of DMPs and variable impedance controller in order to reduce the impact in during the robot motion in noisy environments. Dometios et al. (2018) integrated a Coordinate Change-DMPs (CC-DMP) with a vision-based motion planning method to adapt the reference path of a robot’s end-effector and allow the execution of washing actions. Travers et al. (2016, 2018) proposed a shape-based compliance controller for the ﬁrst time in locomotion, by implementing amplitude compliance on a snake robot moving in complex environment with obstacles. Their approaches allow a snake-like robots to blindly adapt to such complex unstructured terrains thanks to their proprioceptive gait compliance techniques Recently, an adaptive admittance controller is proposed (Wang et al. 2020) which integrates GMR for the extraction of human motion characteristics, DMP to encode a generalizable robot motion, and a RBF-NN-based controller for trajectory-tracking during the reproduction phase. Novel LfD approaches explicitly take into account that training data are possibly generated by certain Riemannian manifolds with associated metrics. Abu-Dakka and Kyrki (2020) reformulated DMPs based on Riemannian metrics, such that the resulting formulation can operate with SPD data in the SPD manifold. Their formulation is capable to adapt to a new goal-SPD-point. Recently, biomimetic controller has been integrated with DMPs (Zeng et al. 2021) in order to learn and adapt compliance skills. 4.3 Reinforcement Learning (RL) In RL, an agent tries to improve its behavior via trial-and- error by exploring different strategies (actions) and receiving a feedback ( reward) on the outcome of its actions. Actions a are drawn from a policyπ(s,a ) that represent a mapping between states s and actions a. The goal of RL is to ﬁnd an optimal policy π⋆ that maximizes the cumulative expected reward, i.e., the sum of expected rewards over a possibly inﬁnite time interval. When the agent is a robot π ϑ ϑ0 reward OR Policy Initialization Robot and Environment DMP Policy Improvement Human Demonstration Figure 14. General block scheme of DMP-based policy improvement. performing tasks in the real world the state and actions spaces are inherently continuous. Moreover, the robotic agent is affected by imperfect ( e.g., noisy) perception and inaccurate models ( e.g., contacts). Finally, performing a large amount of interactions with the real word ( rollouts) is expensive and possibly dangerous. As discussed by (Kober et al. 2013), robotic speciﬁc challenges require speciﬁc solutions to make the RL problem feasible. 4.3.1 DMPs as control policies One possibility is to use parameterized policy and use RL to search for an optimal, ﬁnite set of policy parameters. In this respect, DMPs have been widely used as policy parametererization. The general idea is shown in Figure 14. More in details, (Peters and Schaal 2008a,b) showed that various policy gradient and actor-critic RL approaches can be effectively applied to improve robotic skills parameterized as DMPs. Other research focused on developing policy search algorithms speciﬁcally for parameterized policies. Inspired by stochastic optimal control, Theodorou et al. (2010) proposed Policy Improvement with Path Integrals (PI2) which is an application of path integral optimal control to DMPs. PI 2 and DMPs have been successfully applied in several domains including VILC Buchli et al. (2011a,b) and in-contact tasks (Hazara and Kyrki 2016), grasping under state estimation uncertainties (Stulp et al. 2011), bi- manual manipulation (Zhao et al. 2020), and robot-assisted endovascular intervention (Chi et al. 2018). Kober and Peters (2011) derived from expectation-maximization the so-called Policy Learning by Weighting Exploration with the Returns (PoWER). PoWER and DMPs have been successfully applied to perform highly dynamic tasks including ball- in-a-cup Kober and Peters (2011) and pancake ﬂipping Kormushev et al. (2010). 4.3.2 Limit the search space Even with parameterized policies the number of rollouts needs to search for optimal policy parameters may become large, especially for robots with many DoFs. Dimensionality reduction techniques can be exploited to perform policy search in a reduced space (Colom ´e and Torras 2014). The effectiveness of this approach was demonstrated in the challenging task of clothes ( i.e., soft tissues) manipulation (Colom´e and Torras 2018). IL arises as an effective approach to policy initialization and to speed up policy search by Prepared using sagej.cls