IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 4699 Learning to Assist Different Wearers in Multitasks: Efﬁcient and Individualized Human-in-the-Loop Adaptation Framework for Lower-Limb Exoskeleton Yu C h e n , Graduate Student Member , IEEE,S h uM i a o , Gong Chen , Jing Y e, Chenglong Fu , Member , IEEE, Bin Liang , Senior Member , IEEE, Shiji Song ,a n dX i a n gL i , Senior Member , IEEE Abstract—One of the typical purposes of using lower-limb ex- oskeleton robots is to provide assistance to the wearer by supporting their weight and augmenting their physical capabilities according to a given task and human motion intentions. The generalizabil- ity of robots across different wearers in multiple tasks is impor- tant to ensure that the robot can provide correct and effective assistance in actual implementation. However, most lower-limb exoskeleton robots exhibit only limited generalizability. Therefore, this article proposes a human-in-the-loop learning and adapta- tion framework for exoskeleton robots to improve their perfor- mance in various tasks and for different wearers. To suit different wearers, an individualized walking trajectory is generated online using dynamic movement primitives and Bayes optimization. To accommodate various tasks, a task translator is constructed us- ing a neural network to generalize a trajectory to more complex scenarios. These generalization techniques are integrated into a uniﬁed variable impedance model, which regulates the exoskele- ton to provide assistance while ensuring safety. In addition, an anomaly detection network is developed to quantitatively evalu- ate the wearer’s comfort, which is considered in the trajectory learning procedure and contributes to the relaxation of conﬂicts in impedance control. The proposed framework is easy to implement, because it requires proprioceptive sensors only to perform and deploy data-efﬁcient learning schemes. This makes the exoskeleton practical for deployment in complex scenarios, accommodating different walking patterns, habits, tasks, and conﬂicts. Experi- ments and comparative studies on a lower-limb exoskeleton robot Received 20 March 2024; revised 7 August 2024; accepted 3 September 2024. Date of publication 26 September 2024; date of current version 17 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the Science and Technology Innovation 2030-Key Project under Grant 2021ZD0201404, in part by the Institute for Guo Qiang, Tsinghua University, in part by the Shenzhen Science and Technology Program under Grant KQTD20200909114235003, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant U21A20517 and Grant 52075290. This article was recommended for publication by Associate Editor S. Crea and Editor K. Mombaur upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Xiang Li.) This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the Ethics Committee of the First Afﬁliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University under Application No. MD-043. Y u Chen, Shu Miao, Bin Liang, Shiji Song, and Xiang Li are with the De- partment of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: xiangli@tsinghua.edu.cn). Gong Chen and Jing Y e are with Shenzhen MileBot Robotics Company Ltd., Shenzhen 518000, China. Chenglong Fu is with the Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China. This article has supplementary downloadable material available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2024.3468768, provided by the authors. Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TRO.2024.3468768 are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework. Index Terms —Lower-limb exoskeleton, multitask walking, online adaptation to wearers, proprioceptive sensors. I. I NTRODUCTION L OWER-LIMB exoskeletons have been applied across var- ious domains, such as industry [1], military [2], and re- habilitation [3]. V arious prototypes and commercial products, e.g., ReWalk [4],E k s o[5], and HAL [6] have been developed to address different needs. The primary objective of a lower- limb exoskeleton robot varies depending on its application. For assistive exoskeletons, the goal is often to support the body weight of the wearer and enhance their physical capabilities based on a given task and human motion intention. In contrast, rehabilitation-based exoskeletons may focus on providing spe- ciﬁc resistance or assistance to promote effort, motor learning, and recovery. In the literature, a range of control approaches have been reported, allowing the robot to provide empathetic assistance[7]. However, most of the current lower-limb exoskeletons are de- signed for a speciﬁc task (e.g., ground walking only) or per- sonalized for individual users. When they are deployed for different tasks or users, manual programming or even ﬁne-tuning is typically necessary to set the assistance strategy or reference trajectory. Although the tasks of lower-limb exoskeleton in rehabilitation training are well-deﬁned and largely invariable, the demands are more diverse when assisting a healthy individual (see Fig. 1), encompassing various tasks (e.g., walking, squat- ting, standing up, and climbing stairs), different wearers (with different walking speeds, patterns, or habits), and the appearance of anomalous events during the task (e.g., physical conﬂicts, fatigue, and imbalance). Therefore, the ability of online learning and adaptation to multiple tasks and wearers is important to ensure that the robot provides effective assistance in practical applications. To fulﬁll these requirements, a novel human-in-the-loop (HIL) framework is established in this study to enhance the on- line learning and adaptation ability of lower-limb exoskeletons. The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows. 1) An unsupervised detection network is constructed to ad- dress anomalies during the task. This network prevents the 1941-0468 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4700 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Fig. 1. Proposed method enables the lower-limb exoskeleton (in black) to pro- vide individualized assistance for multiple wearers with different backgrounds (left) and in multiple tasks (right), e.g., walking, sit-to-stand, and climbing stairs. robot from learning or providing assistance based on incor- rect patterns without affecting its generalizability, while optimizing trajectory generation to minimize conﬂicts. 2) An online individualizing approach is developed, using dynamic movement primitives (DMP) to parameterize the assistance trajectory and Bayesian optimization to minimize the cost function, enabling the provision of personalized assistance to multiple wearers. 3) A neural network (NN) is trained to serve as the task translator. This allows optimized assistance for ground walking to be transferred to a variety of tasks which may be difﬁcult for continuous online learning, e.g., stair climbing. 4) A uniﬁed variable impedance model is proposed to in- tegrate the individualized and generalized trajectories. Moreover, a singular-perturbation approach is developed to implement the model with low-computation complexity without the need for force sensors. The proposed framework relies solely on the proprio- ceptive sensors of exoskeleton robots (e.g., encoders and strain gauges), without external sensors (e.g., electroencephalo- graphic/electromyographic (EMG) sensors or motion capture systems). Thus, it can be easily implemented, consistent with the practical scenarios of human assistance. All phases of optimiza- tion and inference are realized online, ensuring data efﬁciency without the need for pretraining. The stability of the compliantly- driven exoskeleton and convergence to the variable impedance model are theoretically grounded. A series of ablation studies and experiments are conducted on a lower-limb exoskeleton robot to illustrate the effectiveness of the developed framework in different tasks and for multiple wearers. In previous work [8], we developed a variable impedance controller to relax physical conﬂicts during the human–robot interaction by using propri- oceptive sensors and a variational autoencoder (V AE)-based detection network. In this study, we extend this controller to an anomaly-sensitive online adaptation framework, considering multiple tasks and individualization. II. R ELA TEDWORKS The section provides an overview of research related to trajec- tory generation and interaction control for exoskeleton robots. Trajectory Generation: This study focuses on the trajectory generation for exoskeletons designed to assist multiple wearers across different tasks. One approach to achieving individualized assistance for mul- tiple wearers is HIL optimization, where the body features and walking habits of the users are implicitly considered [9]. Leveraging sampling-based nonlinear optimization, a HIL op- timization technique for an ankle exoskeleton was ﬁrst pro- posed in [10], where the metabolic rate was reduced through a covariance matrix adaptation evolution strategy (CMA-ES). Further individualization was achieved through an intuitive gait parameter adjustment method named “iterative learning of human behavior (ILHB),” which optimizes joint-reference trajectories based on observed ground contact timing [11]. The HIL optimization concept has also been applied to wear- able robots with multiple joints [12], prostheses [13], and soft exosuits [14]. In addition, reinforcement learning (RL) [15], impedance control [16], and a sampling-efﬁcient method uti- lizing user preferences [17] have been integrated into the HIL optimization framework to offer timely and adaptive assistance. In parallel, various strategies have been proposed to decrease the optimization time. In [18], real-time regression technology is employed to expedite the estimation of steady-state metabolic rates within the HIL framework. In [19], the complexity of assistance variables is reduced by focusing solely on a stiffness parameter. Meanwhile, Jacobson et al.[20] utilized the symmet- ric foot force-time integral as a substitute for estimated metabolic rates. Unlike these studies, which emphasized the reduction of the wearers’ metabolic rate, this article proposes a new cost function to realize both the assistance and wearer’s comfort. Fur- thermore, instead of using multiple external sensors [21], [22], the proposed learning framework relies only on proprioceptive sensors (i.e., encoders on the robot) with better portability and practicability. As the assistance proﬁles for different tasks vary signiﬁcantly, multiple control algorithms have been designed for speciﬁc tasks, such as walking [11], ascending stairs [23], and address- ing gait asymmetry [24].I n [25], the joint kinematics was simultaneously generalized for different walking speeds and slopes using interpolation techniques. Furthermore, kinematics of ascending stairs and transitional motion were predicted based on Bernstein basis polynomials in [26], promoting robustness in the lower-limb exoskeleton. However, these studies typically focused on a single task or task generalization under different conﬁgurations. To encompass multitask assistance, an open- sourced framework for wearable robots was established in [27] to incorporate various cost functions. The researchers in [28] developed a soft and ﬂexible bioelectronic system and extended the assistive scenario to the squatting task. While the aforemen- tioned frameworks could assist with multiple tasks, transferring optimized and individualized results across different tasks is challenging. Interaction Control: The purpose of interaction control is to drive the exoskeleton robot along the generated trajectory while ensuring the safety of the wearer. Among different control schemes, variable impedance control (VIC) has been extensively implemented in various robotic systems involving physical interaction [29]. VIC is inspired by human behavior and biomechanics, wherein the central nervous system can Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4701 Fig. 2. Illustration of a lower-limb exoskeleton driven by SEAs, where a spring is installed between the driving motor and robot joint. Speciﬁcally, u is the control input exerted by the motor,τe signiﬁes the interaction torque,τg denotes the torque resulting from the ground reaction forces Fx,F y ,a n dLs represents the length of the shank. In addition, q refers to the rotational angle of the robot joint, while θindicates the rotation of the motor rotor. continuously modulate the physical impedance of human limbs to adapt to uncertain environments, different types of tasks, and external perturbations [30].I n [31], VIC was deployed in a lower-limb rehabilitation exoskeleton. The deviation between the human intended motion and current joint angle of the ex- oskeleton was used to vary the impedance parameters to resolve physical conﬂict. In [32], VIC was applied to a collaborative assembly task, where the robot varied its stiffness based on the interaction with the human subject and the learned impedance behavior from demonstrations. Furthermore, the impedance parameters can be adjusted while considering other variables, such as the velocity [33] and center of mass location [34]. Several learning-based approaches have also been developed to achieve interaction control. In [35], an inverse RL-based method was designed for impedance learning, where the re- ward function associated with the trajectory tracking error and impedance switching policy for the action space were learned from expert demonstrations. In [36], a RL policy was formulated by combining the output impedance and desired tra- jectory, and a reward term was designed to implement the learned variable impedance policy. In [37], DMP were introduced to learn and reproduce the movement trajectory and stiffness pro- ﬁle learned from demonstrations. In [38], a Gaussian-mixture- model-based, state-dependent variable impedance method was proposed to transfer human impedance behavior to the robot while ensuring stability. Despite signiﬁcant advancements in VIC for exoskeleton robots, most of the existing control schemes cannot detect or al- leviate physical conﬂicts, e.g., motion asynchronization, human fatigue, and imbalance during walking, resulting in potential safety issues. III. P RELIMINARIES The exoskeleton robot considered in this study is driven by series elastic actuators (SEAs), the principle of which is illustrated in Fig. 2. Unlike rigid actuators, an elastic element (e.g., a spring) is installed between the driving motor and robot joint, which can store excessive energy and tolerate impacts, thereby ensuring structural safety. We model each leg individually, and the dynamic model of a SEA-driven exoskeleton robot can be described as follows [39]: M(q)¨q +C(˙q,q)˙q +g(q)= K(θ−q)+ τe +τg (1) B¨θ+K(θ−q)= u (2) where (1) and (2) describe the subsystems at the robot side and the actuator side, respectively, which are coupled with the output torque of the SEA, that is, τo = K(θ−q). Speciﬁcally, q∈ ℜn denotes the vector of the joint angles of the robot; n is the number of degrees of freedom; θ∈ℜn denotes the vector of the rotational angles of the rotors; K∈ℜn×n is the stiffness matrix;M(q) andB∈ℜn×n are the inertia matrices of the robot and actuator, respectively; C(˙q,q)∈ℜn×n is a matrix related to the centripetal and Coriolis forces; g(q)∈ℜn is a vector of gravitational torque;τe ∈ℜn is a vector associated with physical interaction;τg ∈ℜn is the torque vector resulted by the ground reaction forces, and u∈ℜn denotes the control input, which is also the torque exerted by the driving motor. The dynamic model described by (1) and (2) exhibits the following properties [40], [41]: 1) The matrix M(q) is bounded, symmetric, and positive deﬁnite; 2) The term ˙M(q)−2C(q, ˙q) is skew-symmetric; 3) The matrices B andK are constant, diagonal, and positive deﬁnite. We assume that the dynamic parameters (i.e.,M(q),C(˙q,q), g(q), K, and B) are known or can be obtained with sufﬁcient accuracy from datasheets or using calibration and identiﬁcation techniques [42]. The dynamic model of the overall system, described by (1) and (2), exhibits different time scales. Speciﬁcally, the SEA subsystem is slower, and the robot subsystem is faster. To control this system according to the singular perturbation theory [43], the control input can be designed as follows: u = uf +us (3) whereuf denotes the fast time-scale control term for stabilizing (2), andus denotes the slow time-scale control term to stabilize (1). A representative uf can be expressed as follows: uf = −Kv(˙θ−˙q) (4) whereKv ∈ℜn×n is a diagonal and positive-deﬁnite matrix. Substituting (3) and (4) into (2) yields B¨θ+K(θ−q)+ Kv(˙θ−˙q)= us (5) which can be rewritten as follows: B(¨θ−¨q)+ K(θ−q)+ Kv(˙θ−˙q)= us −B¨q. (6) Note that τo = K(θ−q). By introducing K = K1/ε2 and Kv = K2/ε, with εbeing a small positive parameter, (6) can be written as follows: ε2B¨τo +εK2 ˙τo +K1τo = K1(us −B¨q). (7) Whenε=0 , the solution of (7) is ¯τo = us −B¨q. If the fast time-scale is set asγ= t ε,¯τo is achieved atγ→∞ . Note that ¯τo remains constant at ε=0 . Thus, a new variable is introduced as η= τo −¯τo to rewrite (7) on the fast time-scale as follows: B (d2η dγ2 ) +K2 (dη dγ ) +K1η= 0 (8) which is referred to as the boundary-layer system. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4702 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Fig. 3. Proposed framework is organized with three sections, i.e., ofﬂine learning, HIL optimization, and VIC. Then, substituting this solution into (1),a quasisteady-state system can be derived as follows: (M(q)+ B)¨q +C(˙q,q)˙q +g(q)= us +τe. (9) According to the singular perturbation theory, the stability of the overall system is guaranteed if both the boundary-layer system and the quasisteady-state system are exponentially stable. In addition, the control objective for (9) can be speciﬁed as follows: Cd(˙q −˙qd)+ Kd(q −qd)= τe (10) which describes a ﬁrst-order impedance model with the desired damping and stiffness matrices (i.e.,Cd,Kd ∈ℜn×n), allowing the robot joint to deviate from the reference trajectory qd ∈ℜn, thereby ensuring safe interaction. Note that the desired inertia is neglected, matching the lower-limb model of human users [44]. In summary, the wearer’s safety is ensured by both hardware (i.e., SEA) and software (e.g., impedance control) considerations in the proposed framework. Objective: This article aims to propose a new HIL frame- work with both VIC and individualized trajectory generation for lower-limb exoskeleton actuated by SEAs, to provide effective assistance for different wearers in multiple tasks. The overall framework is mainly constituted by three mod- ules, i.e., ofﬂine learning, HIL optimization, and VIC, and hence, it is organized under the section structure in the subsequent de- velopment. The relationship between sections is shown in Fig.3. Speciﬁcally, Section IV presents the anomaly detection network and the task translator, which are used in Section V to generate the individualized trajectory for different human subjects and also shape it in multiple tasks, respectively. The generated and shaped trajectory is included in a variable impedance model in Section VI, whose parameters are varied according to the anomaly score, to regulate the exoskeleton robot’s action to assist the subject. Remark 1: Note that the viscous friction is negligible because other dynamic effects, including the inertia and the output torque of SEA, are more dominant [45]. In the case that the viscous friction is not negligible, it can be approximated and then com- pensated for with learning-based techniques such as [46]. IV . OFFLINE LEARNING The workﬂow of the proposed learning and control framework is shown in Fig. 4. The individualized trajectory is generated through the ofﬂine learning phase and then the HIL optimization. The trajectory is integrated into a variable impedance model, and the robot tracks this model to provide safe and effective assis- tance. Both HIL optimization and impedance control operate simultaneously in the online phase. The proposed framework offers several advantages, including ease of implementation and adaptability to multiple tasks and human subjects. 1) Only proprioceptive sensors, which are typically inte- grated into the exoskeleton, are required for trajectory learning and interaction control, resulting in cost effec- tiveness and reduced complexity; 2) Using common sensors, the robot can effectively adapt to new users and tasks that are not included in the ofﬂine training; 3) This adaptation process requires the data of only a few users to ﬁt the nonlinear relationships between different patterns. In the ofﬂine stage, multiple human subjects wear the ex- oskeleton to perform various tasks (e.g., walking on the ground or ascending stairs, etc.). The joint trajectories of the exoskeleton robot are recorded and represented as the joint motion of human subjects. During the collection of datasets, the robot works under the transparent mode [47] where the motors are powered to drive the robot to passively follow the wearer, thereby simulating his/her natural movements without the exoskeleton; in addition, the interaction force used in such a mode is estimated with the disturbance observer (DOB) such that additional force sensors are not required. The collected datasets are used to train anomaly detection and task translation modules. The anomaly detection module shapes the impedance parameter (with the weighting function) and guides HIL optimization, while task translation establishes the mappings among multiple tasks. Anomaly Detection: During closely coupled interaction, a mismatch between the wearer and robot may result in physical conﬂict, which can adversely inﬂuence the assistance efﬁciency and safety. The proposed framework detects and then alleviates such conﬂicts. The anomaly detection module is based on a V AE (see Fig.4). The V AE, receives two types of information from proprioceptive sensors (i.e., encoders and force sensors built into the exoskele- ton): joint torques (based on spring deﬂection measurements), joint positions (based on rotation angle measurements), and outputs a continuous anomaly score. To handle time-series signals, a sliding window is introduced to segment the data, which is then input to the network. In the proposed network, latent variables are used to capture normal patterns of the input signals and then reconstruct the original data. The anomaly score is obtained by calculating the recon- struction error, which increases when the physical conﬂict is signiﬁcant and decreases when the conﬂict is relaxed. To train the proposed network, the latent variable ρis repa- rameterized as follows: ρ= μ+σ⊙ϵ (11) where μand σare the mean and standard deviation obtained from the encoder, respectively. Sample noise is set to obey the standard normal distribution, i.e., ϵ ∼N(0,I). The loss function can be formulated as follows: LVA E(xt)= ||xt −ˆxt|| 2 +KL[N(μ,σ),N(0,I)] (12) which consists of both the reconstruction error and the Kullback– Leibler-divergence, with xt,ˆxt ∈ℜLsNc denoting the input to Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4703 Fig. 4. Workﬂow of the proposed learning and control method, where M is the number of human users, N denotes the number of tasks, W wm and W sm denote the learned parameters from different tasks, s is the anomaly score. The collected DA TASET is used to train anomaly detection (V AE) and task translation (MLP) modules. Both modules are used to generate the individualized trajectory for different wearers and also shape it in multiple tasks, respective ly, during the HIL optimization. The generated and shaped trajectory is integrated into a variable impedance model (VIC), such that the exoskeleton robot tracks th is model to provide safe and effective assistance. the encoder and the output from the decoder, respectively. Here, Ls denotes the width of the sliding window, and Nc refers to the number of data channels. In anomaly detection tasks, the mean square error (MSE) of reconstruction is typically used to represent the anomaly score [48]. s = MSE(xt,ˆxt)= ||xt −ˆxt|| 2 . (13) Training is performed by inputting the data of M human users, with N tasks for each user, into the constructed V AE. This anomaly detection model is trained in an unsupervised manner, and its output score represents the conﬂict among different wear- ers and tasks. The process for implementing anomaly detection is detailed in the Appendix. Task Translation: All collected datasets are used to train the task translator module, to uncover the relationships among mul- tiple tasks. The proposed task translator is based on a multilayer perceptron (MLP). Unlike V AE-based training, each entry fed into the task translator represents parameterized trajectories (i.e., weight matrices) for various tasks performed by a single user. Details of the trajectory encoding are presented in SectionV.T h e identiﬁed relationships allow the robot to transfer learned tasks to new ones in the subsequent online HIL phase. These tasks are typically not repeatable (e.g., ascending stairs and standing up) and thus impractical for online learning. Fig. 4 illustrates the workﬂow of task translation, wherein wwm and wsm represent the encoded weight vector associated with a single joint, speciﬁcally the knee joint, for user m during the tasks of walking and ascending stairs, respectively. These vectors are processed through DMP , as discussed in Section V. To train the task translator, gait trajectories in the different tasks are collected in weight matrix form as a training set (Wwm,Wsm), whereWwm andWsm are the weight matrices that stack the weight vectors of multiple joints for userm during the tasks of walking and ascending stairs, respectively. Then, the MLP is used to determine the mapping relationship of the weight matrices under different tasks. The predictive weight matrix in the new task is obtained as follows: ˆWsm = Fr(Wwm) (14) where Fr is a nonlinear regression function yielded by a NN. The following loss function is minimized: L = M∑ m l(Wsm, ˆWsm) (15) where l is a differentiable convex loss function that represents the distance between the prediction ˆWsm and targetWsm, and M is the number of users. Function l is written in the following quadratic form: l(W, ˆW)= ∥W − ˆW∥2 F (16) where ∥·∥ F indicates the Frobenius norm. Compared with techniques commonly used for prediction, such as k-nearest neighbors (KNN), Gaussian process regression (GPR), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), gradient boosting (GBoost), and support vector machines (SVM), the proposed NN-based task translator exhibits better generalization perfor- mance over a limited dataset, as validated experimentally. Notably, user-speciﬁc body parameters, such as height and upper limb arm length, relevant to the optimization process [3] and related to gait trajectory, are implicitly incorporated within the weight matrix. For trajectory recording, the proposed task translator requires only proprioceptive sensors. Remark 2: There are frameworks where the exoskeleton robot employs other sensors (instead of proprioceptive ones only) to perceive the wearer’s response or the environmental changes [21], [22], [49]. While using other external sensors does Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4704 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 provide richer information about the wearer and the environment from different perspectives, it usually needs additional installa- tion and also recalibration every time a new task is given. Unlike the aforementioned studies, the proposed framework with pro- prioceptive sensors only has the advantages of relatively low cost, ease of implementation, and fast deployment for multiple wearers and tasks. Remark 3: The measure of conﬂict within this study is deﬁned in relation to the dataset collected (the same as other applica- tions [48], [50]). There might exist instances where certain data points diverge from the training data, yet these deviations are, in fact, normal occurrences when the subject undertakes tasks not encompassed in the dataset, such as walking on different slopes. To address this issue, unseen but normal motion data for additional tasks can be collected and added to train the V AE. Then, even if similar data point deviations occur, they are not ﬂagged as conﬂicts. Remark 4: Compared with a single MSE setting or several independent models, using the V AE for conﬂict detection has several advantages. First, it can receive multimodal data and explore their underlying relationship in latent space to describe the conﬂict without establishing an explicit model and hence achieve more accurate detection. Second, the V AE can generate probabilistic models, which can effectively express the uncer- tainties of wearers. V. H I L OPTIMIZA TION This section presents a new HIL optimization scheme for exoskeleton robots to facilitate their online adaptation to differ- ent wearers (with various walking habits and body parameters) across multiple tasks. This adaptability is important for robots to exhibit operational ﬂexibility in real-world applications. The joint trajectory of the exoskeleton robot is modeled with the approach of DMP [51], which basically encodes the trajectory via an output system as follows: ˙ωi = −2π [ αo(βo ·qDMP,i +ωi)+ ∑J j=1 Ψjwij ∑J j=1 Ψj ] (17) ˙qDMP,i =2 π·ωi (18) Ψj = exp[h(cos(2π·t−cj)−1)] (19) where qDMP,i and ωi correspond to the normalized joint angle and velocity, respectively, for the ith joint. The parameters αo and βo are positive constants. The term wij represents the weights of the ith joint to be updated which can be treated as the trajectory parameters, and Ψj represents Gaussian-like kernel functions with a width h and center cj . In practice, after determining the number of kernels J, h is typically set as 2.5 J and cj is evenly spaced in [0,2π]. Under such formulation, the trajectory parameters are ﬁrst initiated in the ofﬂine phase with the dataset, and then the parameters are updated in the online phase to generate the desired trajectory, as seen in Fig. 5. Trajectory Parameterization:Given that the dataset records a series of joint trajectories for multiple wearers in multiple tasks, the mean trajectory is selected for demonstration and denoted as the vector qdemo. In the ofﬂine phase, the trajectory param- eters are initialized by setting them as qDMP = qdemo, where Fig. 5. Under the DMP formulation, the trajectory parameters are ﬁrst initiated in the ofﬂine phase with the dataset, and then the parameters are updated in the online phase to generate the individualized trajectory. qDMP =[qDMP,1,...,q DMP,i,...,q DMP,n]∈ℜn, and then the parameters (i.e., the weighting matrix) are learned through in- cremental locally weighted regression (ILWR) [52] as follows: wij(t+1)= wij(t)+ΨjQij(t+1)er,ij(t) (20) Qij(t+1)= 1 Λ ( Qij(t)− Qij(t)2 Λ Ψj +Qij(t) ) (21) er,ij(t)= 1 (2π)2 ¨qdemo,i +αo ( βo ·qdemo,i + 1 2π˙qdemo,i ) −wij(t) (22) whereΛdenotes a forgetting factor, andQij ander,ij denote the auxiliary variable and regression error, respectively, withqdemo,i being the demonstration on joint i (i.e., the ith element of the vectorqdemo). ILWR learning weights offer advantages of high computational efﬁciency, avoiding overﬁtting, and mitigating the impact of noisy data. The method of trajectory encoding using DMP has already been open-sourced. 1 Trajectory Generation : In the online phase, the trajectory parameters are updated with the proposed HIL method (which is to be detailed later) and now the desired trajectory can be computed in a forward manner as follows: qDMP = fp(t,W,Ωc) (23) where Ωc is the gait frequency, W is the weight matrix with elementswij , where each row ofW corresponds to the weights associated with a single joint, and fp is the function that in- tegrates the output system with a subsequent integral process. To determine the frequency Ωc, another canonical system is implemented as follows: ˙φij = jΩi −kc1ei sin(φij) (24) ˙Ωi = −kc1ei sin(φi1) (25) ˜qi = ∑ j Aij cos(φij) (26) 1[Online]. Available: https://github.com/STAN-32/HIL_BO_with_DMP_ encoder Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4705 ˙Aij = kc2ei cos(φij) (27) ei = qi −˜qi (28) where qi is the current state of the ith joint, obtained using encoders installed to the joints of the robot. The terms ˜qi andei are deﬁned as the auxiliary state and the learning error for joint i, respectively. φij and Aij represent the phase and amplitude of the jth component in the ith joint, respectively, and kc1 and kc2 are positive constants. Then, we have as follows: Ωc = 1 Na Na∑ i Ωi (29) where Na is the number of the active joints. Note that the gait frequency is computed by detecting the discrete events of heel strikes with the strain gauge at the footplate. Now, the desired trajectory can be speciﬁed as qd = qDMP. Note that discrete movements [51], such as sitting and standing, can also be represented using DMP within a uniﬁed framework by encoding them as a weight matrixW . In addition, as the time required to perform the movement does not vary signiﬁcantly across individuals, speed modulation is not required. Therefore, the generated trajectory can be expressed as follows: qd = { fp(t,W,Ωc), periodic movement fd(t,W), discrete movement (30) where fd(t,W) is the second-order dynamic system under discrete movement conditions. Next, the generated trajectory is optimized under the HIL framework. Speciﬁcally, a comprehensive cost function is for- mulated using both the parameterized trajectory and anomaly score as follows: JHIL(s,q,W)= λ T Na∑ i T∑ j (q(j) di −q(j) i )2 + 1−λ T T∑ j s(j) (31) where the superscript and subscript indicate the time index and joint index in a gait cycle, respectively. Furthermore, T represents the duration of one gait cycle. The ﬁrst term ensures that the generated trajectory matches the speciﬁc user, and the second term helps ignore the abnormal patterns of the user (likely attributable to physical conﬂicts) during the learning process. The weight of these two terms is governed by the hyperparameter λ∈(0,1). Speciﬁcally, when λ =0 , optimization is based on only the collected dataset. Conversely, whenλ =1 , the emphasis shifts to optimizing the trajectory alignment. Bayesian optimization is applied to determine the global minimum ofJHIL(s,q,W) under a bounded feasible set, which has proven effective in previous HIL protocols [53].T ot h i s end, the selected matrices and their associated costs are collated intoWpast and J past, respectively. Note that J past is formulated as a vector. Subsequently, we model the target function using Gaussian processes as follows:[ Jnew J past ] ∼N ( 0, [ Knn KT pn Kpn Kpp ]) (32) where Jnew represents the cost corresponding to the weight matrix W new to be identiﬁed. Notably, setting the mean as zero simpliﬁes the calculation, which has proven effective in practice [53] as most of the information is contained in the covariance. Using the radial basis function as the kernel function, k(x,x′), we introduce kernel matrices Knn,Kpn, and Kpp with the following elements: Knn = k(Ve c(W new), Ve c(W new)) (33) Kin = k(Ve c(Wi), Ve c(W new)), Wi ∈Wpast (34) Kij = k(Ve c(Wi), Ve c(Wj)). Wi,Wj ∈Wpast (35) Here, V ec(·) denotes a vectorization function. Following the construction of the posterior distribution, we use the lower conﬁdence bound (LCB) as the acquisition function for guiding the selection of the subsequent point for exploration as follows: W new =a r g m i n W new μnew −υσnew (36) μnew = KT pnK−1 pp J past (37) σnew = Knn −KT pnK−1 ppKpn (38) where υis a positive hyperparameter. The minimization of (36) is implemented using the L-BFGS algorithm. This process enables iterative updates of the posterior distribution based on historical data, and the appropriate weight matrix is then derived from the acquisition function. To accelerate the convergence over the extended dimensions compared with previous research, the initial parameters are speciﬁed based on the sampled gait. Subsequently, the optimal weight matrix W∗for the walking task can be learned based on the proposed cost function. In addition, the methodology for conducting the optimization is now publicly available. Minimizing (31) can yield an individualized and anomaly- robust trajectory (i.e.,qd), allowing the robot to learn the correct and appropriate gait trajectory under all conditions to improve the effectiveness of assistance and the wearer’s comfort. After the walking optimizationW∗ wm for userm is obtained, the optimal weight matrix for a new task can be predicted using the proposed task translator as follows: ˆW ∗ sm = Fr(W∗ wm) (39) which enables the provision of predictive assistance ˆW ∗ sm without the demonstration of a new task based on the known optimization result. Thus, the proposed HIL optimization frame- work can effectively adapt to multiple wearers and tasks. The process for individualized trajectory generation is detailed in the Appendix. VI. V ARIABLE IMPEDANCE CONTROL The individualized and generalized trajectory is embedded into a variable impedance model to regulate the robot’s action to provide safe and effective assistance. The impedance model is varied according to the anomaly score presented in Section IV to alleviate physical conﬂicts with the wearer. We consider the following aspects. 1) When the anomaly score oscillates around a small value, the robot should ignore such minor conﬂicts to avoid over- reaction; 2) When the anomaly score exceeds a certain threshold, signiﬁcant conﬂicts may arise, which must be promptly addressed by the robot. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4706 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 To this end, the anomaly score is transformed into a weighting function, shown in Fig. 4, which is deﬁned as follows: w(s)= λ1 tanh ( −s χ1 +χ2 ) + λ2 (40) where λ1 and λ2 are positive constants that determine the range and median of the weighting function, respectively; χ1 is a constant that normalizes the anomaly score into a speciﬁed small range; and χ2 represents the offset of the weighting function from the origin of the coordinates along the positive horizontal axis. Next, the desired impedance model (10) is reformulated with the weighting function as follows: Cd(˙q −˙qd)+ Kd(q −qd)= 1 w(s)τe. (41) Multiplying both sides of (41) with w(s) yields Ca(t)(˙q −˙qd)+ Ka(t)(q −qd)= τe (42) where Ca(t) △ = w(s)Cd and Ka(t) △ = w(s)Kd, varying ac- cording to the weighting function. Speciﬁcally, when the anomaly score increases, w(s) is reduced, thus lowering the impedance parameters and ensuring that the robot reacts pas- sively to the conﬂict. Otherwise, the impedance parameters return to their original values to maintain the assistance. Then, an impedance vector is introduced as follows: z = ˙q −˙qr = ˙q −˙qd +C−1 d Kd(q −qd)− 1 w(s)C−1 d τe (43) where ˙qr = ˙qd −C−1 d Kd(q −qd)+ 1 w(s)C−1 d τe (44) is a reference vector. According to(43), the convergence ofz → 0 implies the realization of the desired impedance model (41). Notably, the impedance vector(43) depends on the interaction torque τe. To eliminate the use of sensors for torque measure- ment, a model-based DOB [54] is established to estimate the interaction torque as follows:⎧ ⎨ ⎩ ˙y = −L(˙q,q)y −L(˙q,q)[K(θ−q) −C(˙q,q)˙q −g(q)+ p(˙q,q)] ˆτe = y +p(˙q,q) (45) where ˆτe ∈ℜn denotes the estimated interaction torque, and y ∈ℜn is an auxiliary vector used to make the observer inde- pendent of acceleration information. According to [55], the observer gain matrix L(˙q,q) ∈ℜn×n and vector p(˙q,q) ∈ℜn can be expressed as follows: { L(q, ˙q)= A−1M−1(q) p(˙q,q)= A−1 ˙q (46) where A∈ℜn×n denotes a constant and invertible matrix to be determined. With the deﬁnition of the observation error as ˜τe = ˆτe −τe, the closed-loop equation of the DOB can be given as follows: ˙˜τe = −L(q, ˙q)˜τe −˙τe. (47) The following proposition can be derived to guarantee the con- vergence of ˜τe. Proposition 1: In the presence of ∥˙τe∥≤ζwhere ζdenotes the bound, the disturbance tracking error ˜τe is globally uni- formly ultimately bounded, when A is chosen such that the following condition is satisﬁed: A+AT −AT ˙M(q)A = Γ> 0 (48) whereΓis a positive deﬁnite matrix. Proof: Consider the following candidate Lyapunov function: Ve = ˜τT e ATM(q)A˜τe. (49) DifferentiatingVe with respect to time and substituting (47) into the expression yields ˙Ve = −˜τT e (A+AT −AT ˙M(q)A)˜τe + ˙τT e ATM(q)A˜τe + ˜τT e ATM(q)A˙τe. (50) According to Schwartz inequality and the boundedness of∥˙τe∥, it can be deduced that ˙Ve ≤− λmin(Γ)∥˜τe∥2 +2ζλmax(M(q))∥A∥2∥˜τe∥ = −(1−ϱ)λmin(Γ)∥˜τe∥2 −ϱλmin(Γ)∥˜τe∥2 +2ζλmax(M(q))∥A∥2∥˜τe∥ (51) whereϱ ∈(0,1). BecauseVe ≤λmax(M(q))∥A∥2∥˜τe∥2, the inequality of ˙Ve ≤− (1−ϱ)λmin(Γ) λmax(M(q))∥A∥2Ve (52) is obtained if ∥˜τe∥≥ 2ζλmax(M(q))∥A∥2 ϱλmin(Γ) . (53) When (53) is satisﬁed, the last two terms of (51) are positive, and thus, inequality (52) is guaranteed. Therefore,˜τe converges asymptotically to the ball with radius 2ζλmax(M(q))∥A∥2/ϱλmin(Γ) [41]. ■ The analytical solution of matrix A can be expressed as follows [55]: A−1 = 1 2(σ1 +2βσ2)I ∥ ˙M(q)∥≤ σ1,∥M(q)∥≤ σ2 (54) whereβis a positive constant related to the convergence rate. As mentioned in Section III, the overall control input is designed as (3), with the fast time-scale control term deﬁned as in (4). Next, using the estimated interaction torque ˆτe,t h e slow time-scale control term is established to stabilize (1) and achieve the desired impedance model as follows: us = −Kzz −ˆτe −kg · sgn(z) +(M(q)+ B)¨qr +C(˙q,q)˙qr +g(q) (55) where sgn(·) is the sign function deﬁned as follows: sgn(z)= ⎧ ⎨ ⎩ 1,z > 0 0,z =0 −1,z κ, we have as follows: ˙V ≤− zTKzz 0 and ˙V< 0,t h e quasisteady-state system is also ex- ponentially stable. According to Tikhonov’s theorem [56],t h e stability of the closed-loop system is guaranteed, and conver- gence to the impedance vector is ensured. VII. E XPERIMENT The proposed scheme was implemented in a bilateral lower- limb exoskeleton robot to assess its performance, as shown in Fig. 6. All four joints of the robot, comprising two hip joints and two knee joints, were actuated by SEAs, with each leg having a weight of 6 kg. The spring stiffness of each SEA was 635 Nm, and the output torque was determined based on the spring deﬂection (measured using encoders) and known stiffness. The TABLE I DYNAMIC PARAMETERS IN THE EXPERIMENT robot was equipped with two types of proprioceptive sensors: strain gauges and encoders (with 2048 lines). These sensors provided comprehensive task-speciﬁc information, including gait phases (measured using strain gauges), interaction torque, and movement trajectory (measured using encoders). During the experiment, four wireless surface EMG sensors (Ws450, Bio- metrics Ltd.) were mounted on human leg muscles, speciﬁcally, the quadriceps femoris (QF) and tibialis anterior (TA) muscle of the left and right legs, to collect the feedback of human limb and, hence, assess the performance of the proposed controller. The control algorithm was programmed and realized by the main board, as shown in Fig. 6. The main board transmitted the control commands through the pulsewidth modulation (PWM) signals to the four slave boards to drive the motion of the four robot joints. The command frequency of the main board for sending control commands and PWM signals is set at 1 kHz, while the control frequency of the slave board operates at4 kHz. Furthermore, owing to the constraints imposed by the hip joint components on the wearer’s body shape and in order to reduce variable dimensions in optimization, only the two motors located at the knee joint were activated in this experiment. Note that the dynamic parameters of the exoskeleton are obtained based on the open-source Orocos Kinematics and Dynamics Library (KDL). 2 Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst, the exoskeleton is disassembled into a series of links and joints to construct the robot model, which deﬁnes the physical structure of the robot, including attributes such as the length, mass, and inertia of each link; then, the forward dynamics are calculated using Newton–Euler equations, by referring to that model. This article considers the bilateral lower-limb exoskeleton with knee-joint actuation, and its dynamic model, derived from the general form, can be further described according to its speciﬁc structure and conﬁguration as follows: 1) The hip joints are modeled as loads to the knee-joint motors; 2) The lower leg is almost always vertical, as the angle between the lower leg and the vertical line is small during the standing phase and most of the swing phase; 3) Given the relatively slow walking speed, the inertial effect caused by the base movement can be omitted. Then, the corresponding dynamic parameters can be speciﬁed in Table I. In addition, since the dynamic model is dependent on the gait state, the gait state is taken into account within the KDL framework, where it is integrated with the position and velocity feedback and utilized for the computation of dynamics. Here are the experiments included in the following section. 2[Online]. Available: https://www.orocos.org/wiki/orocos/kdl-wiki.html Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4708 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Fig. 7. Experimental setup for HIL optimization, where the participant walks on a treadmill with the exoskeleton. 1) Anomaly Detector: This experiment aimed to assess the performance of our anomaly detection network. A par- ticipant intentionally held the robot to simulate conﬂict scenarios or adopted varied gait patterns to mimic balance loss due to fatigue. In addition, ablation studies were performed to show that the use of the force information provided by the SEA structure could enhance the detec- tion accuracy compared with that associated with single sensory input. 2) Task Translator: A comparative study was conducted to evaluate the accuracy of the proposed task translator in translating multiple various tasks. 3) HIL Optimization: This experiment was to validate the feasibility of online optimization, speciﬁcally, on two new participants who were not included in the precollected dataset. The participants were instructed to walk at a comfortable pace on a treadmill (FIT, Bertic, USA), and the frequency of reference trajectory was set to a constant according to (29). This speed remained constant during the optimization process, as depicted in Fig. 7. 4) Translated Assistance: In this experiment, the translated trajectory was implemented in the exoskeleton, and par- ticipants were instructed to wear the lower-limb exoskele- ton and perform various tasks with different types of assistance. Importantly, participants were unaware of the speciﬁc type of assistance being provided during the experiment. The experimental schedule for those required to continuously wear the lower limb exoskeletons is illustrated in Fig. 8. Ten non-disabled participants with no prior experience with exoskeletons performed multiple tasks while wearing the ex- oskeleton. Table II presents an overview of the participants’ statistical attributes, namely, age (25.6± 1.9 y), weight (66.3 ± 14.8 kg), and height (173.4 ± 9.1 cm). The experimental proto- col was approved by the ethics committee initiated by Shenzhen MileBot Robotics Company Ltd. in May 2023. All participants signed a written informed consent form prior to the experimental sessions. Fig. 8. Structured schedule for data collection, HIL training, data collection for HIL evaluation, and data collection for evaluation under the translation to new tasks. TABLE II STA TISTICALINFORMA TION OF THE SUBJECTS TABLE III MUTIPLE TASKS PERFORMED BY THE PARTICIPANTS During the experiments, participants performed ﬁve speciﬁc tasks at their own pace: walking, ascending stairs, descending stairs, squatting, and standing up. These tasks are outlined in Table III and depicted in Fig. 9. Note that each participant underwent a 6-min pretraining session to become familiar with each task. Throughout data collection, the exoskeleton was powered ON and operated in a transparent mode to allow the wearer to comfortably perform multiple tasks, and the motion frequency was recorded using (29). During squatting and standing tasks, operating the exoskeleton solely in transparent mode was found to induce noticeable discomfort for the wearer as his or her weight was not properly supported. To mitigate this, the ex- oskeleton applies a constant torque to support the wearer, with the magnitude of the torque meticulously adjusted for each individual to ensure comfortable movement. In addition, Fig. 10 presents the knee joint angle proﬁles for all ten subjects under different tasks, and the constructed dataset was used to train the anomaly detection and task translation modules. Remark 5: From Fig. 2, the ground reaction force can be expressed as Fg =[ Fx,Fy]T , with Fx being the component parallel to the ground andFy perpendicular to the ground. Then, Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4709 Fig. 9. Participants wearing the exoskeleton perform various tasks. (a) Walking. (b) Ascending stairs. (c) Descending stairs. (d) Squatting. (e) St anding up. Fig. 10. Gait proﬁles of the knees over different tasks: (a) Walking; (b) Ascending stairs; (c) Descending stairs; (d) Squatting; (e) Standing up. The mean trajectory of the right knee is depicted by a solid red line, accompanied by a red-shaded area that indicates its standard deviation. Similarly, the mean trajecto ry of the left knee is illustrated by a solid black line, with the corresponding standard deviation represented by a black-shaded area. The RMSEs (rad) for the traje ctories of the two legs across different tasks for all ten subjects are as follows: (a) 0.082. (b) 0.083. (c) 0.143. (d) 0.031. (e) 0.034. the resulting torque on the knee joint is speciﬁed as follows: τg = FxLs cos(qhip +qknee)+ FyLs sin(qhip +qknee). (62) During the ground walking, the vertical componentFy predomi- nates in the ground reaction force[22], andFx is relatively small due to the relatively slow speed (and experimental data show thatqhip +qknee in (62) ranged from−0.24rad to0.17rad ). In addition, because the ankle joint is passive, the forces exerted by the wearer on it further attenuate the impact of the ground reaction forces on the knee joint. Hence, the resulting torque τg is relatively small in this article. Furthermore, τg can be treated as disturbance [57] and mitigated with disturbance rejection techniques in position control. Next, the gravitational torque, i.e., g(q) in (1), varies ac- cording to the hip and knee joints. However, since the hip joints of our developed exoskeleton are inactive, this article treats the thigh as the load on the knee joint and describes the gravitational torque for both the stance and the swing phases as g(q)= 1 2mtLt sinqknee, wheremt andLt are the mass of thigh and respective distances of the center of mass of the thigh from knee joint. VIII. R ESULTS A. Anomaly Detector Before training the anomaly detector, the min-max normal- ization technique was applied to reformat the sensory data of the exoskeleton robot and ensure scale uniformity. When the participant wearing the exoskeleton could easily perform the task, the collected data were considered normal. Otherwise, they were regarded as abnormal due to physical conﬂicts between the human and robot. The architecture of the anomaly detection network devel- oped in this study is presented in Table IV. Note that the parameters for the sliding window width and the number of channels have been established as Ls = 100 and Nc =1 0, respectively. During the experiment, a participant intentionally held the robot to simulate conﬂict. The output of the detection network in this condition is shown in Fig. 11. The reconstruction error signiﬁcantly increased when the conﬂict arose, indicating the wearer’s discomfort. This ﬁnding highlighted that the anomaly could be successfully detected. Furthermore, the performance of the detection network was validated in another simulated conﬂict, where the participant lost balance due to fatigue. The Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 TABLE IV ARCHITECTURE OF THE DETECTION NETWORK Fig. 11. (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) Snapshots of conﬂict due to asynchroniza- tion. (g) Anomaly score during asynchronization. The red contour represents the foot during the stepping motion. results are shown in Fig. 12, further reinforcing the network’s capacity to successfully detect such conﬂicts. The comparison results are shown in Fig. 13. The detection performance was evaluated using the receiver operating charac- teristic (ROC) curve, which indicates how well a classiﬁcation model can distinguish classes. In general, a larger area under the curve (AUC) indicates better performance. Fig. 13 shows that the anomaly detection network incorporating both angular and force information demonstrated a higher AUC than systems relying on single sensory input across two scenarios (i.e., asyn- chronization and imbalance). This ﬁnding highlights that the proposed anomaly detection network enables more precise de- tection, owing to its ability to handle diverse anomaly scenarios with speciﬁc manifestations. For instance, in the presence of asynchronization between the human and robot, the interaction torque rapidly increased. Conversely, in cases of imbalance due to human fatigue, angular information on the human limb, such as encoder signals, changed more signiﬁcantly. Fig. 12. (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (f) Snapshots of conﬂict due to imbalance. (g) Anomaly score during imbalance. The red contour represents the foot during the stepping motion. Fig. 13. AUC values (shown in the legend) and the ROC curve of multimodal detection in comparison with single input systems (using only the torque or encoder information) in two scenarios: (a) Asynchronization. (b) Imbalance. B. Task Translator To accommodate trajectories across different tasks, the col- lected data were used to train a task translator. This process was modeled as a regression problem to promote generalization across diverse tasks. Owing to the limited sample size, we used a leave-one-out cross-validation approach and applied various techniques to address the regression problem, namely, ridge regression, KNN, GPR, XGBoost, GBoost, SVM, and NN. Trajectories were encoded into weight matrices correspond- ing to distinct tasks to allow these techniques to predict the transformation of the weight matrix from one task to another, for example, the transition from walking to ascending stairs. In the assessment of the regression outcome, both the ground truth and the predicted result are transformed into joint space from weight matrices. Subsequently, the root mean square error (RMSE) within the joint space was used as the evaluation metric Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4711 Fig. 14. Translation results across different tasks. (a) Ascending stairs. (b) Descending stairs. (c) Squatting. (d) Standing up. The red solid line represents the mean of the true proﬁle, with the red shade indicating its standard variation. Conversely, the black solid line indicates the prediction from the task translator, with the surrounding black shade denoting its standard variation. TABLE V TRANSLA TIONRESULTS FOR ASCENDING STA IR S TABLE VI TRANSLA TIONRESULTS FOR ST ANDING for this regression task. The RMSE values are expressed in degree units. A comparison of the translation from walking to ascending stairs, using the aforementioned techniques, is presented in Table V. The experimental results indicate that the NN-based translator exhibited superior performance among the compared models. In determining the number of kernels for optimization, a larger quantity of kernels enables the DMP to express more detailed tra- jectory features. However, this concurrently leads to an increase in the number of optimization variables, which consequently prolongs the time required for HIL optimization. To better bal- ance the online computation and the representation, it is selected thatJ =2 0based on practical experience. Upon ascertaining the kernel number for the rhythmic motion, the same approaches were used to execute the translation into TABLE VII CHARACTERISTICS OF SUBJECTS IN HIL discrete movements, speciﬁcally, the transitions between the squatting and standing postures. The translation outcomes for standing are summarized in Table VI. Among the evaluated methods, the NN outperformed the other techniques and was thus selected for the translation of these discrete movements. Considering both optimization efﬁciency and expression of DMP , the ﬁnal kernel number was selected as Jd =1 5. Hence, within the framework of the task translator, we se- lected the NN for translation. The translation results for all ten subjects, derived from the application of the leave-one-out cross- validation, are visualized in Fig. 14. Note that the reproduced proﬁle aligns satisfactorily with the collected gait proﬁle across different tasks, despite the limitations of a small dataset. This is evident in the metric of the average RMSE, which yields values of 3.33 for ascending stairs, 2.64 for descending stairs, 2.93 for squatting, and 2.89 for standing up. The attributes of these participants, along with their selected walking speeds, are summarized in Table VII. The proposed variable impedance controller, described by(3), (4), and (55), was implemented in the exoskeleton robot to assist the human while detecting and relaxing physical conﬂicts. The impedance parameters were set as follows: Cd =1 5I2,Kd = 13I2 whereI2 is a2×2 identity matrix. The parameters of the weighting function were set as λ1 =1 ,χ1 =1 0,χ2 =1 2, and λ2 =1 ; and the control parameters were set as Kv =1 0−3I2 and Kz =2 5I2. The performance of the variable impedance controller was initially veriﬁed in walking tasks. The desired trajectories, actual joint trajectories, controller outputs, and Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4712 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Fig. 15. Joint position and desired position in the walking task. (a) Left knee. (b) Right knee. Fig. 16. Controller outputs and estimated interaction torques in the walking task. (a) Left knee. (b) Right knee. estimated interaction torques for the left and right legs are illustrated in Figs.15 and 16. The RMSE of the position-tracking error for the left and right legs is 0.0996 rad and 0.1149 rad, respectively. When the joint trajectory lags behind the desired trajectory, the controller outputs a positive force to assist walk- ing, while ensuring the realization of the target impedance model. Moreover, experimental outcomes in scenarios involving anomalies are presented in Fig. 17. The subject was instructed to resist the exoskeleton intentionally during the interval of 14− 26 s, as referenced in the 23rd s of the Supplementary Material. During this period, the impedance parameters decreased (i.e., w(s)) when the anomaly score increased, relaxing the conﬂicts. The adjustment of impedance was continuous as the change in w(s) was smooth, thereby ensuring safe human–robot in- teraction. The impedance vector z was around zero, proving the realization of variable impedance. Leveraging the proposed anomaly-aware variable impedance controller, we aligned the trajectory improvement through Bayesian optimization in an online manner, without undermining the safety. An additional frequency response analysis was performed to further afﬁrm the stability of the controller within the exoskeleton system, the details of which are provided in the Appendix. To evaluate the performance of various participants in the walking task, we used the metric deﬁned in (31) to guide trajectory optimization. Only the motors in the knees were activated to aid the wearers, such that the weight matrix W was reduced to a simple weight vector. During the initial phase of standing, the ﬁrst ten elements of the weight vectors, which represent the encoded trajectory, were similar across all walking tasks. To alleviate the computational complexity, these ele- ments were ﬁxed to the mean of the data. The assistive proﬁle was updated upon every seventh heel strike. The initial six gaits were reserved for recording sensor signals to evaluate the performance with human interaction, and the ﬁnal gait was input to the Bayesian optimization algorithm. This approach prevented any sudden changes in the assistive proﬁle that may have affected the balance of the wearers during consistent walking. Note that the proposed method encodes the trajectories into a weighting matrix and searches the optimal conﬁguration for those trajectory parameters. Since the optimal trajectory param- eters are usually around the normal human walking trajectory, we set the parameter space to be within ±30% of the weighting vector of the discovered optimal trajectory, which is sufﬁcient to cover the optimal trajectory and also able to improve the searching efﬁciency. Subsequently, we halved the boundaries whenever the optimal vector remained static over the last ten steps. This method allowed the optimization process to reﬁne the optimal weights, thereby enhancing the search efﬁciency without compromising the convergence certainty. The objective of the optimization pro- cess is to identify the optimal weighting vector that minimizes the cost, and this operation is executed in real-time. Speciﬁcally, it took around 14 min for the proposed HIL method to achieve the optimal conﬁguration for each λ, i.e., 60 iterations, given seven steps per cycle. In addition, a total of ten restarts were executed to bypass local optima. C. HIL Optimization Fig. 18 illustrates the HIL optimization outcomes. The blue and black solid lines correspond to the optimal trajectories when λ =1 and 0, respectively; the red trajectory depicts the mean and variance of the optimization outcomes for λ values between (0,1), i.e., λ =0 .25,0.5,0.75. The results revealed that an optimal trajectory with λ =1 tended toward lazy assistance because the optimization term overly emphasized trajectory alignment, thereby causing the trajectory to converge to a curve with a smaller stretch amplitude. In contrast, forλ =0 , where the cost function consisted solely of the anomaly scores output by the NN, the ﬁnal optimized trajectory exhibited heightened and frequent ﬂuctuations. When λ ranged between 0 and 1, its effect on the trajectory optimization was signiﬁcantly similar. This may be attributable to λ eliminating the gap between the dataset and participant actions during optimizing based on the anomaly score. Essentially, the ﬁrst term in (31) was optimized to a lower value, and then the trajectory details were improved according to the human machine interaction results, thereby minimizing conﬂict and enhancing comfort. Additional tests were performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the optimization results. Speciﬁcally, an indirect, quantitative evaluation of user comfort and assistance effectiveness was performed using EMG signals from the TA and QF, along with the average power transferred by the exoskeleton per step. The metrics were averaged for both the left and right legs over a single step. Furthermore, the transferred power was calculated based on the estimated interaction torque multiplied by the motor velocity. Fig. 19 shows the experimental outcomes in Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4713 Fig. 17. Experimental results using the proposed variable impedance controller: The impedance parameters were scaled down (black dashed line) when the anomaly score increased (blue solid line), thereby alleviating the conﬂicts. The adjustment of impedance is continuous as the change in w(s) is smooth, ensuring safe human–robot interaction. The impedance vector (red dashed line) was around zero, proving the realization of the variable impedance model. Fig. 18. HIL optimization results of different hyperparameters λ for different participants. (a) Participant 1. (b) Participant 2. The blue and red solid lines represent the optimized trajectories in the context of λ =1 and λ =0 , respectively. The black solid line is the mean of the trajectories, with λ ∈(0, 1), and the surrounding black shade indicates its standard variation. Fig. 19. Comparative evaluation of different modes across participants: (a) RMS of EMG signals from the TA, indicative of user comfort; (b) RMS of EMG signals from the QF; (c) Average power transferred by the exoskeleton per step, with negative and positive values indicating resistance and assistan ce, respectively. the transparent mode, with the optimized trajectory and without exoskeleton wear. Considering the minimal inﬂuence ofλ on the trajectory optimization results, we included only cases where λ equaled 0, 0.5, and 1. The outcomes suggested that a trajectory produced with λ =0 .5 could not only ensure optimal comfort, as evidenced by the small amplitude of the EMG signal, but also provide effective assistance, i.e., maximum power transfer under all conditions. Remark 6: The HIL results have been improved with respect to the existing works because: 1) It has reduced the time cost (e.g., 64 min with four iterations in [10]). 2) There is always a tradeoff between faster optimization and more variables. Although other methods may be faster, the proposed method incorporates the highest number of optimization variables to date (i.e., 20 versus 4 in the literature [21]), thereby capturing more in-depth details of different wearers’ walking habits, resulting in a larger exploration space and enabling better generalization across diverse tasks. 3) Unlike other studies that rely on time- consuming metabolic rate measurements [10], the proposed method focuses on the improvement of comfort using anomaly scores, thereby saving time by eliminating the need for these measurements. D. Translated Assistance The trajectories derived from HIL optimization were used to accommodate various tasks, including ascending stairs, de- scending stairs, and the combined tasks of squatting and standing up. Fig. 20 offers a visualization of these translated trajectories along with the trajectory acquired in the transparent mode. Within our dataset, the average trajectory is referred to as the “normative trajectory.” The ﬁndings demonstrated that, compared with the normative trajectories, the translated trajectories could enable the provision of appropriate assistance, as referenced in the 2 min and 48 s of the Supplementary Material. When ascending stairs, the elevated stepping leg received assistance in knee ﬂexion to facilitate foot landing. Conversely, for descending stairs, the Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Fig. 20. Translation of optimized assistance across different tasks: (a) Ascending stairs; (b) Descending stairs; (c) Squatting; (d) Standing up. T he red arrows denote the corresponding interactive forces exerted by the exoskeleton assistance. The blue and red solid lines represent the translation of optimi zed trajectories from Participants 1 and 2, respectively. The black dashed line represents the prediction from the task translator, with the surrounding black shade d enoting its standard variation. TABLE VIII MODES translated trajectories were consistent with the desired trajectory, which allows the robot to support the body weight through the impedance controller. Similarly, tasks such as squatting and standing up were assisted by weight support achieved through trajectory optimization. At the beginning of the squatting task, the translated trajectories exhibited an upward curve that de- viated from the immediate decline observed in the normative trajectory, suggestive of preparatory actions for weight support. To validate the effectiveness of the translated assistance, we compared the EMG signals of the TA and QF and the average power transfer per step under different conditions: transparent mode, normative mode, optimized mode, and a scenario without the exoskeleton, as summarized in Table VIII. The ﬁndings from these experiments are illustrated in Fig. 21. Notably, the tasks of squatting and standing up were treated as one combined task, with a 1-s separation used to distinguish the two. In terms of minimizing the amplitude of the EMG signal and augmenting power transfer, the translated assistance demon- strated a modest improvement over the normative mode. This outcome suggested that the optimized and translated trajectories converged in the same latent space. Speciﬁcally, the translator, which was trained using the collected dataset, could be directly applied to the results of the HIL optimization. Our proposed task translator could thus enhance comfort and assistance across various tasks based on the HIL results from the walking task. Therefore, we not only optimized the task trajectories that posed challenges for online optimization but also reduced the time required for task transfer. IX. C ONCLUSION A. Limitations The limitations of our method include the following. 1) The proposed HIL method involves optimizing multiple dimensions for encoded trajectories. Although this ap- proach can capture the walking habits of different indi- viduals and be generalized to multiple tasks, the tradeoff is an increase in the overall time cost as more joints are simultaneously optimized. 2) Due to the limitation of the current mechanical design, the developed exoskeleton would require additional con- nectors to activate the hip joints for speciﬁc wearers (e.g., female subjects with slim bodies). However, the addition of these connectors would signiﬁcantly affect the comfort of wearers. Hence, optimization at the hip joint was not considered in this study. 3) The transition between different desired trajectories (e.g., from walking to ascending) is not automatically triggered. For a speciﬁc task requiring robot assistance, trajectory pa- rameters must be manually switched to the corresponding settings. Subsequently, these parameters are continuously updated using the proposed HIL method to better suit the speciﬁc wearer. The function of automatic transition may be achieved with an SVM or extended Kalman ﬁlter [16]. Those limitations will be addressed in future work. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4715 Fig. 21. Comparative evaluation of different modes across participants. Translation results for (a), (b), and (c) stair ascent; (d), (e), and (f) sta ir descent; (g), (h), and (i) squatting and standing up. Each column depicts different metrics: RMS of EMG signals from TA and RMS of EMG signals from QF, indicating user comfort; and average power transferred by the exoskeleton per step, with negative values indicating resistance and positive values denoting assist ance. B. Conclusion This article proposes a novel adaptation framework for exoskeleton robots to customize the assistance provided to different wearers during multiple tasks. Speciﬁcally, the indi- vidualized trajectory is generated using DMP and online opti- mization, which can then be transformed to other trajectories for different tasks with the trained NN. The individualized trajectory is incorporated in the variable impedance controller to drive the robot to provide assistance while ensuring a safe interaction. The advantages of the proposed framework can be summarized as follows: 1) An anomaly detection network is applied to improve wearing comfort during HIL optimization and relax potential conﬂicts during implementation; 2) the proposed approach is data-efﬁcient with HIL adaptation ability, allowing the robot to promptly adapt to new users in new tasks, even with limited samples; and 3) the framework requires only proprioceptive sensors and is thus easy to implement. The proposed method is evaluated using the training samples of ten users and validation samples of two new users. Experiments and comparative studies are performed over four tasks (i.e., walking, stair ascent, stair descent, and sit-to-stand) to demonstrate the effectiveness of the exoskeleton robot. The intellectual merit and broader impacts for the proposed method can be summarized as follows. First, this article introduces an innovative framework that uses interactive learning techniques to facilitate efﬁcient and individ- ualized adaptations for lower-limb exoskeletons. The proposed framework effectively utilizes the HIL feature, i.e., exploration of the interaction between the exoskeleton and wearer to achieve generalized assistance across various tasks for diverse wearers. This aspect is particularly crucial, given the intricate and dy- namic nature of human movements. Second, the provision of generalized and optimized assis- tance, coupled with the reliance on only proprioceptive sensors, can help catalyze the widespread deployment of lower-limb exoskeletons in both industrial settings and homecare applica- tions. This ability is expected to have a transformative impact on individuals, not only enhancing the quality of life but also driving changes in lifestyle. This innovation can help address the growing labor shortage in various sectors, which is crucial for managing the challenges posed by a rapidly aging society. APPENDIX Algorithm 1: Anomaly Detection. Require:q, ˙q,θ, ˙θ,K(θ−q) 1: Initialize sliding window queue 2: for each new data point do 3: xt now ← (q, ˙q,θ, ˙θ,K(θ−q)) 4: Enqueue xt now to sliding window queue 5: if sliding window queue is full then 6: xt w ← GetWindowData() 7: xt ← Flatten(xt w) 8: xt e ← Encoder(xt) 9: μ← FCμ(xt e) 10: σ← FCσ(xt e) 11: ϵ ← SampleNoise() 12: ρ← μ+σ⊙ϵ 13: ˆxt ← Decoder(ρ) 14: s ← CalculateMSE(xt,ˆxt) 15: Output: s 16: Dequeue from sliding window queue 17: end if 18: end for Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 Algorithm 2: Individualized Trajectory Generation. Require:s,W,q 1: Initialize λ,Na 2: for each gait do 3: T ← Duration 4: Jnew(s,q,W) ← Equation(31) 5: W new ← Bayesian_Optimization(Jnew) 6: if optimization ﬁnished then 7: W∗← W new 8: if translation to task A then 9: ˆWA ← Fr(W∗) 10: qd ← DMP( ˆWA) 11: else 12: qd ← DMP(W∗) 13: end if 14: Output: qd 15: end if 16: end for A. Simulation of HIL Optimization This simulation study is to validate the feasibility of the proposed method for the hip and knee joints simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, we used the hip and knee joint trajectories of a participant as the target trajectories for optimization, referred to asqSim, which correspond to the joint trajectories that achieved the lowest cost function in real experiments. We used the mean trajectory of the knee joint from the collected data and hip joint trajectory of another participant as the initial values, which were encoded into a weighting matrixWinitial for optimization. In this simulation, the uncertainties in human interaction and network inference were implicitly considered by modeling them as noise in the weight matrix as follows: Wnext = W new +Eϵ (63) where W new represents the solution in the current iteration, andEϵ ∈ℜNa×J is the noise matrix symbolizing the integrated uncertainty, with parameters set as Na =2 and J =2 0.N o t e that the gait frequency was normalized toΩc =2 π, and the cost function was deﬁned as follows: JSim(W)= MSE(qSim(t)−fp(t,W,Ωc)). (64) Then, the weighting matrix undergoes joint optimization via Bayesian optimization for both joints, and the results are shown in Fig. 22. The target trajectory is indicated by the black dashed line, while the initial trajectory and trajectory generated by the optimal weighting matrix are represented by the red and blue solid lines, respectively. The optimization process involved 147 iteration steps. The results demonstrated that the proposed method can identify the optimal weighting matrix within a reasonable time frame for both joints. B. Frequency Response To enhance the validation of the stability offered by the proposed variable impedance controller, frequency response tests were performed on the integrated actuator and exoskeleton system. During these tests, the system operated under impedance Fig. 22. Simulation results for the HIL optimization. (a) Hip joint. (b) Knee joint. Fig. 23. Bode plot of the compliantly actuated exoskeleton system with controller operated in an open-loop. The system input is the desired joint angle (◦) and the output is the joint angle ( ◦). control mode without the application of external forces, degen- erating the controller into a position-based control scheme. The desired joint position is used as the system input command, and the corresponding positional responses were measured across varying frequency setups, with the proposed impedance con- troller operating in an open-loop conﬁguration. The results of the numerical analysis, as illustrated in Fig. 23, depict the dynamic characteristics of the complete exoskeleton system. The benchtop data acquired from this experiment reveal that the phase margin for the actuator-exoskeleton system is approx- imately93◦, with a gain margin nearing15.7 dB, which demon- strates the stability and robustness of the proposed controller. REFERENCES [1] M. P . D. Looze, T. Bosch, F. Krause, K. S. Stadler, and L. W. O’sullivan, “Exoskeletons for industrial application and their potential effects on physical work load,” Ergonomics, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 671–681, 2016. [2] A. B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and A. Chu, “Biomechanical design of the berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX),” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 128–138, Apr. 2006. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. CHEN et al.: LEARNING TO ASSIST DIFFERENT WEARERS IN MULTITASKS: EFFICIENT AND INDIVIDUALIZED HIL ADAPTA TION FRAMEWORK 4717 [3] X. Li et al., “BEAR-H: An intelligent bilateral exoskeletal assistive robot for smart rehabilitation,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. , vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 34–46, Sep. 2022. [4] A. Esquenazi, M. Talaty, and A. Jayaraman, “Powered exoskeletons for walking assistance in persons with central nervous system injuries: A narrative review,”PM&R, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 46–62, 2017. [5] L. Brenner, “Exploring the psychosocial impact of EKSO bionics technol- ogy,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 97, no. 10, 2016, Art. no. e113. [6] M. Iizuka and Y . Ikeda, “Regulation and innovation under the 4th industrial revolution: The case of a healthcare robot, HAL by cyberdyne,” Techno- vation, vol. 108, 2021, Art. no. 102335. [7] T. Teramae, T. Noda, and J. Morimoto, “EMG-based model predictive control for physical human–robot interaction: Application for assist-as- needed control,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 210–217, Jan. 2018. [8] X. Zhang et al., “Multi-modal learning and relaxation of physical conﬂict for an exoskeleton robot with proprioceptive perception,” in Proc. IEEE 2023 Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , 2023, pp. 10 490–10 496. [9] P . Slade, M. J. Kochenderfer, S. L. Delp, and S. H. Collins, “Personalizing exoskeleton assistance while walking in the real world,” Nature, vol. 610, no. 7931, pp. 277–282, 2022. [10] J. Zhang et al., “Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance during walking,” Science, vol. 356, no. 6344, pp. 1280–1284, 2017. [11] K.-W. Park, J. Choi, and K. K. Kong, “Iterative learning of human behavior for adaptive gait pattern adjustment of a powered exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1395–1409, Jun. 2022. [12] P . W. Franks, G. M. Bryan, R. Reyes, M. P . O’Donovan, K. N. Gregorczyk, and S. H. Collins, “The effects of incline level on optimized lower-limb exoskeleton assistance: A case series,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 30, pp. 2494–2505, 2022. [13] Y . Wen, A. Brandt, J. Si, and H. H. Huang, “Automatically customizing a powered knee prosthesis with human in the loop using adaptive dynamic programming,” in Proc. IEEE 2017 Int. Symp. Wearable Robot. Rehabil. , 2017, pp. 1–2. [14] Y . Ding, M. Kim, S. Kuindersma, and C. J. Walsh, “Human-in-the-loop optimization of hip assistance with a soft exosuit during walking,” Sci. Robot., vol. 3, no. 15, 2018, Art. no. eaar5438. [15] Y . Zhang, S. Li, K. J. Nolan, and D. Zanotto, “Adaptive assist-as-needed control based on actor-critic reinforcement learning,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2019, pp. 4066–4071. [16] Z. Li, X. Li, Q. Li, H. Su, Z. Kan, and W. He, “Human-in-the-loop control of soft exosuits using impedance learning on different terrains,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2979–2993, Oct. 2022. [17] U. H. Lee et al., “User preference optimization for control of ankle exoskeletons using sample efﬁcient active learning,” Sci. Robot. ,v o l .8 , no. 83, 2023, Art. no. eadg3705. [18] P . Kantharaju, H. Jeong, S. Ramadurai, M. Jacobson, H. Jeong, and M. Kim, “Reducing squat physical effort using personalized assistance from an ankle exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 30, pp. 1786–1795, 2022. [19] T.-C. Wen, M. Jacobson, X. Zhou, H.-J. Chung, and M. Kim, “The personalization of stiffness for an ankle-foot prosthesis emulator using human-in-the-loop optimization,” inProc. 2020 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2020, pp. 3431–3436. [20] M. Jacobson et al., “Foot contact forces can be used to personalize a wearable robot during human walking,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 12, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 10947. [21] D. F. Gordon, C. McGreavy, A. Christou, and S. Vijayakumar, “Human- in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance via online simulation of metabolic cost,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1410–1429, Jun. 2022. [22] X. Tan, B. Zhang, G. Liu, X. Zhao, and Y . Zhao, “A time-independent control system for natural human gait assistance with a soft exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1653–1667, Apr. 2023. [23] S. Hood, L. Gabert, and T. Lenzi, “Powered knee and ankle prosthe- sis with adaptive control enables climbing stairs with different stair heights, cadences, and gait patterns,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1430–1441, Jun. 2022. [24] Y . Qian, H. Y u, and C. Fu, “Adaptive oscillator-based assistive torque con- trol for gait asymmetry correction with a nSEA-driven hip exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 30, pp. 2906–2915, 2022. [25] E. Reznick, K. Embry, and R. D. Gregg, “Predicting individualized joint kinematics over a continuous range of slopes and speeds,” in Proc. IEEE 8th RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot. Biomechatronics , 2020, pp. 666–672. [26] S. Cheng, E. B.-Nieto, C. G. Welker, and R. D. Gregg, “Modeling the transitional kinematics between variable-incline walking and stair climbing,” IEEE Trans. Med. Robot. Bionics , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 840–851, Aug. 2022. [27] P . Kantharaju et al., “Framework for personalizing wearable devices using real-time physiological measures,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp. 81 389– 81 400, 2023. [28] J. Kim et al., “Soft wearable ﬂexible bioelectronics integrated with an ankle-foot exoskeleton for estimation of metabolic costs and physical effort,” npj Flexible Electron., vol. 7, no. 1, 2023, Art. no. 3. [29] C.-C. Cheah and D. Wang, “Learning impedance control for robotic manipulators,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 452–465, Jun. 1998. [30] M. Shariﬁ, A. Zakerimanesh, J. K. Mehr, A. Torabi, V . K. Mushahwar, and M. Tavakoli, “Impedance variation and learning strategies in human-robot interaction,”IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 6462–6475, Jul. 2022. [31] Y . Huo, X. Li, X. Zhang, and D. Sun, “Intention-driven variable impedance control for physical human-robot interaction,” in Proc. 2021 IEEE/ASME Int. Conf. Adv. Intell. Mechatron., 2021, pp. 1220–1225. [32] L. Rozo, S. Calinon, D. G. Caldwell, P . Jimenez, and C. Torras, “Learning physical collaborative robot behaviors from human demonstrations,”IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 513–527, Jun. 2016. [33] F. Ficuciello, L. Villani, and B. Siciliano, “V ariable impedance control of redundant manipulators for intuitive human–robot physical interaction,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 850–863, Aug. 2015. [34] Y .-C. Pai, B. Maki, K. Iqbal, W. McIlroy, and S. Perry, “Thresholds for step initiation induced by support-surface translation: A dynamic center- of-mass model provides much better prediction than a static model,” J. Biomech., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 387–392, 2000. [35] X. Zhang, L. Sun, Z. Kuang, and M. Tomizuka, “Learning variable impedance control via inverse reinforcement learning for force-related tasks,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2225–2232, Apr. 2021. [36] M. Bogdanovic, M. Khadiv, and L. Righetti, “Learning variable impedance control for contact sensitive tasks,”IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6129–6136, Oct. 2020. [37] C. Y ang, C. Zeng, C. Fang, W. He, and Z. Li, “A DMPs-based framework for robot learning and generalization of humanlike variable impedance skills,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1193–1203, Jun. 2018. [38] Z. Jin, A. Liu, W.-a. Zhang, and L. Y u, “An optimal variable impedance control with consideration of the stability,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1737–1744, Apr. 2022. [39] A. A.-Schäffer, C. Ott, and G. Hirzinger, “A uniﬁed passivity-based control framework for position, torque and impedance control of ﬂexible joint robots,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–39, 2007. [40] C. C. Cheah and X. Li, Task-Space Sensory Feedback Control of Robot Manipulators, vol. 73. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2015. [41] S. Arimoto, “Control theory of nonlinear mechanical systems,” in A Passivity-Based Circuit-theoretic Approach. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press 1996. [42] M. M. Olsen and H. G. Petersen, “A new method for estimating parameters of a dynamic robot model,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 95–100, Feb. 2001. [43] M. W. Spong, “Modeling and control of elastic joint robots,” J. Dyn. Sys., Meas. Control, vol. 109, no. 4, pp. 310–318, Dec. 1987. [44] C. A. Oatis, “The use of a mechanical model to describe the stiffness and damping characteristics of the knee joint in healthy adults,” Phys. Ther ., vol. 73, no. 11, pp. 740–749, 1993. [45] S. Han, H. Wang, and H. Y u, “Human–robot interaction evaluation-based AAN control for upper limb rehabilitation robots driven by series elastic actuators,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 3437–3451, Oct. 2023. [46] X. Li, Y . Liu, and H. Y u, “Iterative learning impedance control for reha- bilitation robots driven by series elastic actuators,” Automatica, vol. 90, pp. 1–7, 2018. [47] Y . Zimmermann, E. B. Küçüktabak, F. Farshidian, R. Riener, and M. Hutter, “Towards dynamic transparency: Robust interaction force track- ing using multi-sensory control on an arm exoskeleton,” in Proc. 2020 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , 2020, pp. 7417–7424. [48] S. Lin, R. Clark, R. Birke, S. Schönborn, N. Trigoni, and S. J. Roberts, “Anomaly detection for time series using V AE-LSTM hybrid model,” in Proc. ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2020, pp. 4322–4326. [49] Y . Qian et al., “Predictive locomotion mode recognition and accurate gait phase estimation for hip exoskeleton on various terrains,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 6439–6446, Jul. 2022. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 4718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. 40, 2024 [50] D. Park, Y . Hoshi, and C. C. Kemp, “A multimodal anomaly detector for robot-assisted feeding using an LSTM-based variational autoencoder,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. , vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 1544–1551, Jul. 2018. [51] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P . Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynam- ical movement primitives: Learning attractor models for motor behaviors,” Neural Comput., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013. [52] S. Schaal and C. G. Atkeson, “Constructive incremental learning from only local information,” Neural Comput., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 2047–2084, 1998. [53] M. Kim et al., “Bayesian optimization of soft exosuits using a metabolic estimator stopping process,” in Proc. 2019 Int. Conf. Robot. Automat. , 2019, pp. 9173–9179. [54] A. Mohammadi, H. J. Marquez, and M. Tavakoli, “Nonlinear disturbance observers: Design and applications to Euler? Lagrange systems,” IEEE Control Syst. Mag., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 50–72, Aug. 2017. [55] A. Mohammadi, M. Tavakoli, H. J. Marquez, and F. Hashemzadeh, “Non- linear disturbance observer design for robotic manipulators,”Control Eng. Pract., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 253–267, 2013. [56] A. N. Tikhonov, “Systems of differential equations containing small parameters in the derivatives,” Matematicheskii sbornik , vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 575–586, 1952. [57] Z. Li et al., “Human-in-the-loop control of a wearable lower limb exoskele- ton for stable dynamic walking,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2700–2711, Oct. 2021. Yu Chen(Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in automation from Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 2022. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in control science and engineering with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. His research interests include wearable robots and physical human-robot interaction. Shu Miao received the M.S. degree in electrical en- gineering from Northeastern University, Shenyang, China, in 2019, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from the Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China, in 2023. He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow with the De- partment of Automation, Tsinghua University, Bei- jing, China. His research interests include robotic cell manipulation and medical robotics. Gong Chen received the B.E. degree in mechanical engineering and automation from Shanghai JiaoTong University, Shanghai, China, in 2011, and the Ph.D. degree in biomedical engineering from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2016. He is currently the CEO of Shenzhen MileBot Robotics Company, Ltd., Shenzhen, China. His re- search interests include wearable exoskeleton and compliant actuator. Jing Y ereceived the Ph.D. degree in biomedical en- gineering from Waseda University, Shinjuku, Japan, in 2015. He is currently the CTO of Shenzhen MileBot Robotics Company, Ltd., Shenzhen, China. His re- search interests include rehabilitation robots, surgical robots, and motion assistance robots based on human- computer interaction for patients with limb movement disorders. Chenglong Fu (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in mechanical engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2007. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Mechanical and Energy Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China. He has authored or coauthored more than 80 IEEE/ASME/Elsevier journal papers and more than 80 international conference proceedings. His re- search interests include wearable robots and physical human-robot interaction. Bin Liang (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in precision instruments from Tsinghua Uni- versity, Beijing, China, in 1994. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Automation and the leading Director of the Insti- tute of Navigation and Control, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He has authored and coauthored two books, two book chapters, 30 patents, and more than 150 research papers. His research interests include robotics, intelligent control, etc. Dr. Liang is the Vice Directing Member of China Society of Image and Graphics and was the Vice Directing Member of Chinese Society of Astronautics. Shiji Song received the Ph.D. degree in mathematics from the Department of Mathematics, Harbin Insti- tute of Technology, Harbin, China, in 1996. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. He has authored more than 180 research papers. His current research interests include pattern recognition, system modeling, optimization, and control. Xiang Li (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineering from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor with the De- partment of Automation, Tsinghua University, Bei- jing, China. His research interests include robotic ma- nipulation, human–robot collaboration, control and planning, and micro/nano robots. Dr. Li was the recipient of the Best Application Paper Finalist award in 2017 IROS and the Best Medical Robotics Paper Finalist award in 2024 ICRA. He led the XL - Team and won the ﬁrst place in 2024 ICRA Robotic Grasping and Manipulation Challenge (RGMC) In-hand Manipulation Track and also won the Most Elegant Solution across all the tracks. He has been serving as the Associate Editor of IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMA TIONLETTERS since 2022, and also the Associate Editor of IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON AUTOMA TIONSCIENCE AND ENGINEERING since 2023. He is the Program Chair of the 2023 IEEE International Conference on Real-time Computing and Robotics. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:59:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.