3062 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 4, APRIL 2025 Human-in-the-Loop Optimization for Knee Exoskeleton Flexion Assistance Zhipeng Wang , Baichun Wei , Member , IEEE, Zhen Ding, Jianfei Zhu, Lianpeng Zhang , Xiangduan Zeng, and Chunzhi Yi , Member , IEEE Abstract—Human-in-the-loop optimization (HILO) has been used to identify subject-speciﬁc assistive strategies and improve the performance of wearable exoskeletons. However, there is still a gap in research on HILO regarding knee exoskeleton ﬂexion assistance. We present a HILO methodology that optimizes the ﬂexion torque delivered by the knee exoskeleton. The cooperation mechanism of ﬂexor and antagonist muscles assisted by the exoskeleton is ﬁrst analyzed through the dynamic model. Furthermore, the online rapid metabolic evaluation function, including the electromyo- graphic (EMG) signals of the semitendinosus (SEM) and vastus medial (VM), is designed based on the cooperative working mech- anism of the antagonist muscle. The upper and lower controllers are designed respectively to realize the construction of the HILO closed-loop control system. Finally, we experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of the HILO methodology proposed in this letter through EMG and metabolic indicators. In particular, for the knee joint, the time required to identify assistance strategies is signiﬁ- cantly reduced by our protocol. This research will contribute to the design of fast convergence HILO methods from the perspective of human natural driving. Index Terms —Human-exoskeleton system, human-in-the-loop optimization (HILO), knee exoskeleton ﬂexion assistance, rapid evaluation function. I. I NTRODUCTION W ITH the development of technology, wearable lower limb exoskeletons are increasingly used in rehabilitation Received 24 August 2024; accepted 25 December 2024. Date of publication 6 January 2025; date of current version 19 February 2025. This article was recommended for publication by Associate Editor V . Novak and Editor J.-H. Ryu upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62076080 and Grant 52205064, in part by the Natural Science Foundation of ChongQing under Grant CSTB2022NSCQ-MSX0922, and in part by the Postdoctoral Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province of China under Grant LBH-Z22175. (Corresponding author: Lianpeng Zhang.) This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the Chinese Ethics Committee for Registering Clinical Trials under Protocol No. ChiECRCT20200319. Zhipeng Wang, Lianpeng Zhang, and Xiangduan Zeng are with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Shijiazhuang Tiedao University, Shijiazhuang 050043, China (e-mail: wangzp@stdu.edu.cn; zhanglianpeng@stdu.edu.cn; zxdysu@163.com). Baichun Wei, Jianfei Zhu, and Chunzhi Yi are with the Faculty of Com- puing and School of Medicine and Health, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China (e-mail: bcwei@hit.edu.cn; nyzhujianfei@stu.hit.edu.cn; chunzhiyi@hit.edu.cn). Zhen Ding is with the College of Computer and Control Engi- neering, Northeast Forestry University, Harbin 150040, China (e-mail: dingzhen@nefu.edu.cn). Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/LRA.2025.3526558 training and light mobility [1], [2], [3]. The higher the level of customization of the exoskeleton’s assistance, the better its ability to adapt to changes in the participants’ physiology [4], [5], [6]. The HILO is inﬂuenced by factors such as force load- ing accuracy, assist proﬁle, optimization method, and objective function [7], [8]. Research on knee exoskeletons focuses primar- ily on control methods to ensure force loading accuracy[9], [10]. In terms of assist proﬁle, the assist proﬁles to be optimized for the hip and ankle joints are similar to the statistical proﬁles [11], [12]. Due to frequent power conversion in the knee joint, the energy storage and release mechanism was initially used to con- struct the ﬂexion-assisting proﬁle [13]. Optimization strategies are widely used for HILO [7], [14]. Gradient descent mainly depends on the signal-to-noise ratio of the measured metabolic value [15]. Compared to the gradient descent, the convergence time of Bayesian optimization for a hip exoskeleton was reduced by more than half [11]. On the other hand, the covariance matrix adaptive evolution strategy was used to calculate the next gen- eration of control law for the knee exoskeleton [16]. Metabolic consumption in the above studies is measured using indirect calorimetry, which still has limitations in speed, comfort, and generalization [17]. With the development of wearable sensor technology, some studies have estimated metabolic consumption based on physi- ological signals [18], [19], [20], [21]. Muscle activation is used as the objective function of HILO [22]. Experimental results show that the hip exoskeleton can reduce the muscle activation of the rectus femoris by at least 33.56%. On the other hand, the optimization time for a single iteration is only one-quarter of that required for indirect calorimetry. A generalizing model, using EMG data from different subjects, is constructed to estimate human energy expenditure [23], [24]. Model ﬁtting based on multi-subject data is challenging due to varying muscle com- positions between individuals [25]. Compared to the dataset, prediction or evaluation methods that only include the par- ticipant’s own physiological signals may be more worthy of attention [26], [27]. A data-driven model is developed to link human movement with metabolic consumption during ankle ex- oskeleton assistance[28]. The optimization time used to estimate metabolic consumption through the data-driven model is similar to that in[22]. The above analysis shows that using physiological signals to evaluate metabolism can enhance the efﬁciency of human-machine adaptation. However, more research is needed on HILO, with human physiological signals as the objective function, under the assistance of the knee exoskeleton. 2377-3766 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. W ANG et al.: HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP OPTIMIZA TION FOR KNEE EXOSKELETON FLEXION ASSISTANCE 3063 Fig. 1. Control block diagram of HILO. DOB: disturbance observe, GC: gait cycle, DFT: discrete Fourier transform, ˙θd speed command, F interaction force, θh encoder angle, G2e(s) nominal model, G2f (s) partial feedforward model. In this case, we ﬁrst analyze the coordination relationship between the ﬂexor and antagonist muscles through dynamic model. Combined with the collaborative working mechanism of the ﬂexor/antagonist muscles, we construct a metabolic rapid evaluation function based on SEM/VM muscle activation. Ad- ditionally, we select optimization variables based on the shape of the assist proﬁle and design the force command proﬁle ﬁtting method. The upper controller, lower controller, and information interaction in the HILO experimental platform are introduced in detail. Finally, the effectiveness of the HILO methodology proposed in this letter is validated through experiments. Our contributions can be summarized as follows. 1) We propose a HILO methodology for knee exoskeleton ﬂexion assistance. 2) We demonstrate that the rapid evaluation function, constructed based on individual EMG baselines and the ﬂexor/antagonist muscle collaboration principle, can prevent the exoskeleton assistance from falling into a locally optimal solution. 3) We demonstrate that the HILO method proposed in this letter can effectively improve the adaptability and efﬁciency of the knee exoskeleton with different individuals. II. K NEE EXOSKELETON AND LOWER CONTROLLER The HILO closed-loop system for knee ﬂexion assistance consists of an exoskeleton, a lower-level controller, and an upper-level controller. The control block diagram is shown in Fig. 1. Our previous research developed a wearable knee exoskeleton [9]. The advantage of the wearable exoskeleton is that the power supply, servo motor, and lower controller can be integrated near the human’s center of mass. The Sbrio-9636 is used as the lower control unit to improve integration. Power is transmitted to the lower limb wearable mechanism through the Bowden cable. Since the Bowden cable transmits power in one direction, free movement of the knee joint can be guaranteed when the motor is returned to its original position. The lower limb wearing mechanism is tightly connected to the limb seg- ment and waist belt through a strap with minimal deformation, weighing only 0.7 kg. The strap connection not only enhances the convenience of wearing the exoskeleton but also prevents misalignment between the exoskeleton and the knee joint axis. The rotational freedom of the lower limb wearable mechanism in the sagittal and coronal planes is achieved through the rotating and the hinge mechanisms, respectively. Angle and force signals are measured using an encoder and force sensor, respectively. The knee joint moves faster than both the hip and ankle joints. The assisted gait phases are the end of the swing phase and the initial landing phase of the adjacent gait. Higher requirements are placed on the gait phase estimation accuracy and exoskele- ton dynamic performance. Therefore, an admittance control framework based on the velocity inner loop is proposed in the lower controller. Speciﬁcally, a disturbance observer (DOB) and partial feedforward are designed to improve the anti-disturbance level of the inner loop. In the outer loop, an angle prediction method based on a Kernel-based nonlinear ﬁlter is designed to compensate for joint motion and the resulting excess force. The predicted data used for compensation should be consistent with the actual data in time series [29]. A feedforward compensation model and an iterative compensation method are proposed to account for the disturbance caused by the deformation of the human-exoskeleton contact surface on the force loading. An enhanced adaptive oscillator (EAO) based on discrete Fourier transform (DFT) is proposed to signiﬁcantly improve the conver- gence speed and accuracy of gait phase estimation. Additionally, the gait phase estimated through the EAO is used to calculate the current gait percentage. The corresponding command value is found in the force command array based on the gait percentage, ensuring the integrity, continuity, and stability of the assist proﬁle in the lower controller over time. A ﬁnite state machine (FSM) control framework is proposed to ensure the smooth operation and seamless switching of the control method during movement. Initially, after the exoskeleton is powered on, the participant assumes a stationary posture. During this phase, the motor rotates at 0.3 r/min until a preload of 10 N is reached. Subsequently, the control method transitions Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3064 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 4, APRIL 2025 Fig. 2. The schematic diagram of the muscle group and the exoskeleton. to a constant force mode with angle compensation. Once the assistance switch is activated, angle data from a 5-second time window are collected to determine the initial fundamental fre- quency of the EAO. And then, the EAO can learn the angle curve recorded by the encoder. Parameters such as the phase period, average error, and maximum error between the predicted and actual input angles are used to assess learning completion. Upon successful learning, the predicted encoder values are gradually incorporated over ﬁve gait cycles to adjust joint movements. The force command then transitions from a constant force to an assis- tance proﬁle synchronized with the EAO phase. In the event of a sudden gait change requiring EAO relearning, the control mode reverts to constant force with traditional angle compensation. The learning process is repeated. The FSM ensures seamless operation and smooth transitions between control modes. III. HILO M ETHODS A. Design of Rapid Evaluation Function Based on the Antagonistic Muscle Collaborative Working Mechanism The muscles associated with the knee joint include the ﬂexor and extensor muscles. At terminal swing, the ﬂexor muscles are activated to reduce the extension speed of the knee joint. At the initial contact, due to the forward shift of the participant’s center of gravity, both the ﬂexor and antagonist (extensor) muscles are activated together to withstand the impact of the heel landing. The coordinated work of the antagonist muscles can enhance joint stiffness and maintain body stability. Due to the structural characteristics of the Bowden cable, only the ﬂexion moment can be generated by the wearable knee exoskeleton in this letter. The schematic diagram showing the relationship between the muscle group and the exoskeleton is presented in Fig. 2. Correspondingly, the dynamics model in the sagittal plane is as follows It ¨θh +bt ˙θh +ktθh = τ+τf −τa (1) whereIt is the equivalent moment,bt is the equivalent damping, kt is the equivalent stiffness,θh is knee joint angle,τis the torque produced by the exoskeleton, τf is the net torque produced by the ﬂexor muscles, and τa is the net torque produced by the extensor muscle. TABLE I RELA TIONSHIPBETWEEN FLEXION TORQUE AND ANTAGONISTIC TORQUE ASSISTED BY EXOSKELETON A signiﬁcant difference between the knee joint and the hip/ankle joints is that the passive element (PE) can store and re- lease energy as positive and negative power alternately changes. The PE can be equivalent to a nonlinear spring. Previous studies have shown that the integrity of the PE’s energy storage and release mechanism is a prerequisite for effective knee ﬂexion assistance [30]. In other words, if the PE’s energy storage and release mechanism is not disturbed, the autonomous movement of the knee joint should be guaranteed as much as possible. Therefore, the left side of the dynamic model can be considered a constant value. Additionally, the relationships between the exoskeleton torque, ﬂexor muscle torque, and antagonist muscle torque on the right side of the dynamic equation are presented in Table I. According to Table I, the relationship between ﬂexion torque and antagonistic torque assisted by the exoskeleton can be divided into three categories. 1#: Exoskeleton assistance can effectively replace part of the net torque of the ﬂexor and extensor muscles, thereby reducing bothτf andτa. 2#: Although the ﬂexion assistance remains effective overall, its effectiveness decreases. Speciﬁcally,τf is reduced while τa is increased. 3#: The intervention of τwill hinder the extension of the knee joint, so both τf and τa must increase together to ensure that human movement is not disturbed. From the above analysis, whenτa increases, the corresponding assistance mode becomes inappropriate. Although different control modes are proposed during the HILO process, the ultimate goal of optimization is to identify the control mode that minimizes energy expenditure. Therefore, the metabolic rapid evaluation function needs to be constructed based on the coordinated work of the antagonist muscles. When the exoskeleton assists the knee joint in the ﬂexion direction, the correlation coefﬁcients between energy expendi- ture and VM/SEM EMG signals exceed 0.85, which is the best correlation compared with other physiological signals [30].A n y reduction in energy expenditure with exoskeleton assistance may be associated with the change of muscle activities with their baselines. The 0-assist mode is deﬁned as 0-force input under EAO motion prediction compensation, which can ensure that the knee joint does not receive any assistance or interference from the exoskeleton. The EMG signal in the 0-assist mode can be regarded as a baseline. Considering individual differences in EMG baselines and the collaborative principle of antagonist muscle work, the rapid evaluation function, as shown in (2),i s constructed. The characteristics of the rapid evaluation function are as follows. 1) The function makes full use of the simultaneous reduction of ﬂexor/antagonist muscles as a necessary condition Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. W ANG et al.: HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP OPTIMIZA TION FOR KNEE EXOSKELETON FLEXION ASSISTANCE 3065 for effective assistance. In other words, it can prevent the assis- tance model from converging to a local optimal solution, where antagonist muscle activation increases, ﬂexor muscle activation decreases, and energy expenditure reduces during HILO. 2). The rapid evaluation function only includes the EMG signals from the speciﬁc participant, avoiding the errors caused by model ﬁtting based on multi-person data. EF = e(SEM ini−mSEM ) lg (mVM VM ini ) (2) where SEM ini and VM ini are the root mean square values of the EMG signals after SEM and VM ﬁltering in the 0-assist mode, respectively,mSEM andmVM are the root mean square values of the EMG signals after SEM and VM ﬁltering within the ﬁve gaits under the exoskeleton assistance, respectively. The ﬁltering is as follows: the raw EMG signal is band-pass ﬁltered at 20–400 Hz, full-wave rectiﬁed, and low-pass ﬁltered at 6 Hz using a fourth-order Butterworth ﬁlter. B. Design of the Assistance Proﬁle If knee ﬂexion is only assisted at the end of the swing or the initial contact phase, the energy storage and release mechanism will be disturbed. The active contraction unit of the muscle ten- don must compensate through concentric contraction, thereby consuming more energy [13]. Our previous research has also demonstrated the necessity of a double-peak assistance pro- ﬁle [30]. The natural driving mechanism of human skeletal mus- cles is comparable. However, the double-peak proﬁle’s speciﬁc assistance timing and amplitude may differ due to individual differences in parameters. Studies on ankle exoskeletons have shown that the timing of assistance is a key factor affecting the wearer’s energy expenditure [31]. Similarly, the terminal swing’s half-peak and peak assisting time are selected as opti- mization variables, with their optimization ranges set to 83–91% and 93–97% [32], respectively. The range of optimization vari- ables is selected based on the public dataset. Since the assisting time in initial contact is brief, it can be set as constant. In the initial contact, the ﬂexor and antagonist muscles need to be activated together to withstand the impact of the heel landing. Inappropriate exoskeleton ﬂexion torque will lead to increased activation of the antagonist muscles. Therefore, the assisting amplitude before initial contact and the peak value at initial contact are selected as optimization variables, the optimization ranges [32] of which are 0.18–0.61 N/kg and 0.94–1.42 N/kg, respectively. The optimization variables and ranges are shown in Fig. 3. The estimated gait percentage proposed in this letter serves as the horizontal coordinate of the assistance proﬁle, ensuring its integrity and continuity, even if the adjacent gaits are incon- sistent. The cubic spline curve interpolation method is used to interpolate the assist proﬁle to be optimized fully. Through mul- tiple ofﬂine tests, constraint points related to the optimization variables are added to ensure that all data points generated by the cubic spline curve remain within the estimated range. The proﬁle planning method ensures the smoothness, continuity, and uniqueness of the assistance proﬁle, preventing the generation Fig. 3. Knee ﬂexion assistance proﬁle. (a) Optimization variables. (b) Opti- mization range. of abnormal proﬁles, such as mutations or corners. The vector containing the optimization points and constraint points at the terminal swing and the initial contact is shown in (3). X = ⎡ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣ x1 0.87 x2 −0.02 1 .73 x2 1.73 99.2 x3 100 x3 +0.13 0 x3 +0.13 2.2 x4 4.20 .58 ⎤ ⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦ T (3) where x1 and x2 are the terminal swing’s half-peak and peak assisting time, respectively,x3 andx4 are the assisting amplitude before the initial contact and the peak value in the initial contact, respectively. C. Bayesian Optimization Black box functions, data noise, and limited optimization time are typical characteristics of HILO. Compared with existing optimization algorithms, Bayesian optimization can efﬁciently search for the optimal solution by constructing a probabilistic model when experimental samples are limited. In this letter, the four optimized variables and the value of the rapid evaluation function serve as the inputs and outputs of the black box function, respectively. Gaussian processes, as shown in (4), are used as probabilistic surrogate models for Bayesian optimization. The prior of the function can be deﬁned through the Gaussian process, and after observing some function values, it is converted into the function posterior. We assume a priori that the mean function is 0. The ﬁrst 30 samples [15] are randomly selected within the domain to avoid early convergence to a locally optimal solution. f (x) ∼GP (m (x),k (x, x′)) (4) where m(x) is the mean function, k(x, x′) is the covariance function, and x is the data vector. We use the expected improvement function, as shown in (5), as the acquisition function. The variables for further reducing muscle activation can then be estimated within the range of the optimization variables through (6). And then, the fast evaluation Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3066 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 4, APRIL 2025 Fig. 4. HILO experimental platform. function value under the current assist mode is calculated. After each calculation, the newly obtained data is added to the original data set to update the prior estimate. The rapid adaptation is the process of ﬁnding the optimal assistance mode for different individuals through the HILO method in this letter. The HILO process is completed through multiple iterations. I (x)= m i n {0,f n+1 (x)−f (x∗)} (5) x =a r g m i nE (min{0,f n+1 (x)−f (x∗)}∥ Dn) (6) where I(x) is the degree of improvement, fn+1(x) is the most promising sampling point, and f (x∗) is the minimum observed value. D. Testing Protocol The HILO experimental platform, shown in Fig. 4, consists of a host computer, a wireless surface EMG system (DELSYS, MA, USA), and a wearable knee exoskeleton. The experiment is divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part, participants are required to wear a knee exoskeleton and walk on a treadmill at 1.25 m/s to adapt to the different assistance modes. The assistance modes are randomly generated within the deﬁned variable range. Each assistance mode lasts for ﬁve gaits, and the training lasts for 20 minutes in total. There is a minimum one-day break between the ﬁrst and second phases. The second phase involves the HILO experiment. First, the participants walk on a treadmill at a speed of 1.25 m/s for 4 minutes. The EMG signals of the VM and SEM under zero-assisted walking are measured. Then, the RMS values of the ﬁltered EMG signals in the 80th–160th gaits under zero-assisted walking are calculated and substituted into the rapid evaluation function constructed in this letter. Subsequently, the HILO experiment is conducted. The time window for a single iterative optimization is ﬁve complete gaits. The gaits are divided by the EAO in the lower controller. After the HILO experiment, another 4-minute zero-assisted walking is performed. Seven healthy male participants (age 27.3± 3.6 years, weight = 70.4± 6.2 kg, height = 1.76 ± 0.04 m) are recruited for this experiment. All participants have experience walking with a knee exoskeleton and have no musculoskeletal injuries or related diseases. In accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, all par- ticipants were informed of the experimental procedure before the study commenced. The study protocol (ChiECRCT20200319) Fig. 5. Muscle activations of participant 3 corresponding to Table I under exoskeleton assistance. Fig. 6. Motion proﬁles of participant 3 captured by the encoder during HILO. was approved by the Chinese Ethics Committee for Registering Clinical Trials. IV . RESULT The muscle activation of SEM and VM for Participant 3 during the HILO process is shown in Fig. 5. In mode 1#, the mean and peak muscle activation of VM decreased by 19.2% and 11.6%, respectively. The mean and peak muscle activation of SEM decreased by 28.2% and 25.3%, respectively. In mode 2#, although the mean muscle activation of SEM decreased by 7.8%, the mean muscle activation of VM increased by 4.9%. SEM and VM’s peak muscle activation trends are similar, with VM’s peak muscle activation increasing by 27.7%. In mode 3#, the mean muscle activation of SEM and VM increased by 11.7% and 10.7%, respectively. The peak muscle activation of SEM and VM also increased by 11.5% and 19.9%, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 6, the movement state remains basically Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. W ANG et al.: HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP OPTIMIZA TION FOR KNEE EXOSKELETON FLEXION ASSISTANCE 3067 Fig. 7. Muscle activation convergence of participant 5 during HILO. Fig. 8. Optimal assistance proﬁles for different participants. TABLE II COMPARISON RESULTS OF KNEE EXOSKELETON FLEXION ASSISTANCE consistent during the HILO. The muscle activation convergence of participant 5 during the HILO process is shown in Fig.7. Con- vergence is achieved after nearly 120 optimization iterations. The optimal assistance proﬁles for different participants are s h o w ni nF i g .8. For the knee joint, accurate gait phase estimation is essential for effective assistance. On the other hand, for the knee joint with the energy storage and release mechanism involved, the optimal assistance timing at the terminal swing and the assistance amplitude at the initial contact is different for different individuals. Although the range of variables to be optimized is narrow, it also shows that effective knee ﬂexion assistance is more sensitive to the timing and amplitude of assistance. The main comparison results of knee ﬂexion assistance are shown in Table II. The age, weight, walking speed, and other conditions of the experimental subjects in each study are similar. It can be seen that the HILO method in this letter can reduce the muscle activation of the knee ﬂexor/antagonist muscles by 21.8± 4.6% and 24.4 ± 5.6%, respectively. The corresponding Fig. 9. Net metabolic rate of all participants during normal walking (NW), 0-assist walking (0-ass), and walking with the optimised assistance pattern (OA). Fig. 10. Comparison of optimization time and convergence speed of recent HILO studies and current work [11], [15], [33]. energy expenditure is also reduced by 4.1 ± 0.5% as shown in Fig. 9, and the assist effect is signiﬁcantly improved. In addition, due to the small mass and high integration of the wearable exoskeleton in this letter, the metabolic energy consumed by 0-assist walking is only slightly increased compared to normal walking. Therefore, to improve the convenience and practicality of HILO, we collected the EMG signals under 0-assist walking in FSM when constructing the fast evaluation function instead of additionally collecting the EMG signals under normal walking. In Fig. 10, the optimization time and convergence speed of existing research on exoskeleton HILO are comprehensively compared. When the evaluation indicators are all energy ex- penditure measured by indirect calorimetry, the single iteration Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3068 IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 4, APRIL 2025 time required for Bayesian optimization and gradient descent is 180 s and 120 s, respectively. The single iteration time required for Bayesian optimization is lower than that required for gradient descent. When the optimization methods all use the Bayesian, the single iteration times of indirect calorimetry, online simu- lation of metabolic cost, and the fast evaluation function based on muscle activation proposed in this letter are 120 s, 60 s, and 6 s, respectively. Muscle activation can change rapidly according to the change of the assist mode. The optimization time can be shortened to 12 minutes, signiﬁcantly less than other studies. The HILO algorithm can effectively complete the rapid adaptation between the knee exoskeleton and the human. V. D ISCUSSION The coordinated working mechanism of multi-muscle-tendon and exoskeleton: This letter explores the coordination rela- tionship between ﬂexor and antagonist muscles under knee exoskeleton assistance based on the dynamic model. Previous studies have shown that ensuring PE’s energy storage and release mechanism is not disturbed is a prerequisite for effective knee assistance [13]. Therefore, the left side of the dynamic model can be considered constant. From the right side of the dynamic model, it can be obtained that optimal knee ﬂexion assistance can simultaneously reduce the muscle activation of the ﬂexor and antagonist muscles. The experimental results shown in Fig. 5 and Table II prove the correctness of the above conclusion. However, a locally optimal assistance mode also reduces the activation of the ﬂexor muscles while increasing the activation of the antagonist muscles, as shown in Fig. 5. An inappropriate assistance mode will increase the activation of both the ﬂexor and antagonist muscles to ensure that human movement is not hindered. The experimental results of this letter verify that rely- ing solely on the ﬂexor muscles cannot fully express the mapping relationship with energy expenditure. When the activation of the antagonist muscle increases, the corresponding assistance mode must be suboptimal. Rapid evaluation function: The parameters of the rapid eval- uation function constructed in this letter include only the RMS value of the participant’s own EMG, which can avoid the er- rors caused by ﬁtting the model based on test data. The rapid evaluation function, based on the antagonist muscle mechanism, leverages the strong correlation between energy expenditure and SEM and VM under exoskeleton assistance. However, the rapid evaluation function is not intended to ﬁt the mapping relationship between EMG and energy expenditure perfectly. The target value corresponding to the ﬂexor muscle is positive, and the target value will increase as the SEM EMG signal decreases. The overall objective function value is negative only when the RMS value of VM is lower than its initial value. The smaller the RMS value of the ﬂexor/antagonist muscle, the smaller the overall objective function value. The advantage of the rapid evaluation function constructed in this letter is that when the function value is greater than 0, the assistance mode is considered inappropriate. When the rapid evaluation function is less than 0, it helps avoid falling into a locally optimal solution, where ﬂexor muscle activation decreases, antagonist muscle activation increases, and overall energy expenditure is reduced. HILO: Our previous research determined that, based on the natural driving mechanism of the knee joint, a continuous double-peak proﬁle is the effective knee ﬂexion assistance proﬁle between terminal swing and initial contact [30].T h e double-peak proﬁle required for knee ﬂexion assistance changes rapidly, making the appropriate assistance timing at terminal swing more critical. On the other hand, due to variations in individuals’ heights, weights, and landing impact forces, only appropriately matched assistance amplitudes can reduce the ac- tivation of antagonist muscles at initial contact. The performance indicators of HILO include optimization time and effectiveness. The assist timing at the peak and half-peak of terminal swing is designed as the optimized variable. Additionally, the assistance amplitude before initial contact and the peak value at initial contact are designed as variables to be optimized. The range of variables to be optimized is much smaller than that of the hip and ankle joints, which indirectly indicates that the knee joint is sensitive to the optimal assistance mode. It also veriﬁes the necessity of HILO for knee ﬂexion assistance. Since the number of variables to be optimized is set to four and the speed of single iterations is fast, we use the general Bayesian optimization as the upper controller. The rapid evaluation function proposed in this letter can prevent the HILO from falling into a local optimum. Compared to the existing research, the optimization time can be reduced to 12 minutes, signiﬁcantly improving optimization efﬁciency. Using the HILO method proposed in this study, the activation of SEM and VM muscles can be reduced by 21.8 ± 4.6% and 24.4 ± 5.6%, respectively. In previous studies [30] the mean EMG of SEM, based on a statistically assisted proﬁle, was only reduced by 6.1%. Compared to the existing research, the assisting effect is signiﬁcantly improved. Limitations: This article has certain limitations. Thirteen mus- cles are attached to the knee joint. Different motion modes result in signiﬁcant variations in the design of effective as- sist proﬁle shapes, the selection of physiological signals for rapid energy expenditure evaluation, and the development of rapid evaluation functions. To verify the effectiveness of the rapid adaptation of the knee exoskeleton to the participants, this study focuses on the HILO in walking mode. The ﬁndings of this study can provide theoretical support for subsequent HILO of the knee joint in other motion modes. Additionally, the EMG signal sensors and upper controller in our current HILO rapid adaptation experimental platform require further integration and optimization. VI. C ONCLUSION In this letter, we have presented a framework for optimiz- ing exoskeleton control strategies based on muscle synergy and HILO. Speciﬁcally, based on the established multi-muscle- tendon and exoskeleton dynamics model, we analyze that the simultaneous reduction of muscle activation with high relevance to the energy expenditure is the speciﬁc manifestation of effec- tive knee ﬂexion assistance in physiological signals. Besides, the individual EMG baseline difference and the cooperative working Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. W ANG et al.: HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP OPTIMIZA TION FOR KNEE EXOSKELETON FLEXION ASSISTANCE 3069 principle of antagonist muscles are used to construct the rapid evaluation function based on SEM and VM muscle activation. Experiments verify that introducing antagonist muscle activa- tion can effectively prevent the obtained exoskeleton assistance mode from falling into the local optimal solution. The HILO method proposed in this letter reduces the muscle activation of ﬂexor muscles by 21.8 ± 4.6% and antagonist muscles’ muscle activation by 24.4± 5.6%. On the other hand, the single iteration time and overall optimization time of HILO are reduced to 6 s and 12 min, respectively. The mechanism we revealed is helpful for further designing exoskeleton assistance rapid evaluation functions based on wearable sensors. Based on the conclusions of this letter, we will study the HILO strategy under other knee joint motion modes. REFERENCES [1] L. Zongxing, Z. Jie, Y . Ligang, C. Jinshui, and L. Hongbin, “The human- machine interaction methods and strategies for upper and lower extrem- ity rehabilitation robots: A review,” IEEE Sensors J. , vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 13773–13787, May 2024. [2] Z. Li, T. Zhang, P . Huang, and G. Li, “Human-in-the-loop cooperative control of a walking exoskeleton for following time-variable human in- tention,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 2142–2154, Apr. 2024. [3] W. Meng, C. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. Liu, and S. Xie, “Soft ankle-foot exoskeleton for rehabilitation: A systematic review of actuation, sensing, mechanical design, and control strategy,” IEEE Trans. Med. Robot. Bionics ,v o l .6 , no. 2, pp. 384–398, May 2024. [4] S. Song and S. H. Collins, “Optimizing exoskeleton assistance for faster self-selected walking,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 29, pp. 786–795, 2021. [5] H. Xia et al., “Shaping high-performance wearable robots for human motor and sensory reconstruction and enhancement,” Nat. Commun. , vol. 15, no. 1, 2024, Art. no. 1760. [6] Z. Li, X. Li, Q. Li, H. Su, Z. Kan, and W. He, “Human-in-the-loop control of soft exosuits using impedance learning on different terrains,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2979–2993, Oct. 2022. [7] M. Li, Y . Wen, X. Gao, J. Si, and H. Huang, “Toward expedited impedance tuning of a robotic prosthesis for personalized gait assistance by reinforce- ment learning control,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 407–420, Feb. 2022. [8] M. A. Diaz et al., “Human-in-the-loop optimization of wearable robotic devices to improve human–robot interaction: A systematic review,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 7483–7496, Dec. 2023. [9] Z. Wang et al., “Study on the control method of knee joint human– exoskeleton interactive system,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 1040. [10] L. Cheng, C. Xiong, W. Chen, J. Liang, B. Huang, and X. Xu, “A portable exotendon assisting hip and knee joints reduces muscular burden during walking,” Roy. Soc. Open Sci., vol. 8, no. 11, 2021, Art. no. 211266. [11] Y . Ding, M. Kim, S. Kuindersma, and C. J. Walsh, “Human-in-the-loop optimization of hip assistance with a soft exosuit during walking,” Sci. Robot., vol. 3, no. 15, 2018, Art. no. eaar5438. [12] J. Zhang et al., “Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance during walking,” Science, vol. 356, no. 6344, pp. 1280–1284, Jun. 2017. [13] M. Shepertycky, S. Burton, A. Dickson, Y .-F. Liu, and Q. Li, “Removing energy with an exoskeleton reduces the metabolic cost of walking,” Science, vol. 372, no. 6545, pp. 957–960, May 2021. [14] K. L. Poggensee and S. H. Collins, “How adaptation, training, and cus- tomization contribute to beneﬁts from exoskeleton assistance,”Sci. Robot., vol. 6, no. 58, 2021, Art. no. eabf1078. [15] M. Kim et al., “Human-in-the-loop Bayesian optimization of wearable device parameters,” PLoS One, vol. 12, no. 9, 2017, Art. no. e0184054. [16] S. Monteiro, J. Figueiredo, P . Fonseca, J. P . Vilas-Boas, and C. P . Santos, “Human-in-the-loop optimization of knee exoskeleton assistance for min- imizing user’s metabolic and muscular effort,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 11, 2024, Art. no. 3305. [17] J. C. Selinger and J. M. Donelan, “Estimating instantaneous energetic cost during non-steady-state gait,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 117, no. 11, pp. 1406–1415, 2014. [18] M. Compagnat et al., “V alidity of wearable actimeter computation of total energy expenditure during walking in post-stroke individuals,” Ann. Phys. Rehabil. Med., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 209–215, 2020. [19] P . Slade, M. J. Kochenderfer, S. L. Delp, and S. H. Collins, “Sensing leg movement enhances wearable monitoring of energy expenditure,” Nat. Commun., vol. 12, no. 1, 2021, Art. no. 4312. [20] S. Gashi, C. Min, A. Montanari, S. Santini, and F. Kawsar, “A multidevice and multimodal dataset for human energy expenditure estimation using wearable devices,” Sci. Data, vol. 9, no. 1, 2022, Art. no. 537. [21] Z. Ni, T. Wu, T. Wang, F. Sun, and Y . Li, “Deep multi-branch two-stage regression network for accurate energy expenditure estimation with ECG and IMU data,”IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 3224–3233, Oct. 2022. [22] L. Xu et al., “Reducing the muscle activity of walking using a portable hip exoskeleton based on human-in-the-loop optimization,”Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., vol. 11, 2023, Art. no. 1006326. [23] K. A. Ingraham, D. P . Ferris, and C. D. Remy, “Evaluating physiolog- ical signal salience for estimating metabolic energy cost from wearable sensors,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 126, no. 3, pp. 717–729, 2019. [24] O. M. Blake and J. M. Wakeling, “Estimating changes in metabolic power from EMG,” Springerplus, vol. 2, pp. 1–7, 2013. [25] M. Zanghieri, P . M. Rapa, M. Orlandi, E. Donati, L. Benini, and S. Benatti, “sEMG-driven hand dynamics estimation with incremental online learning on a parallel ultra-low-power microcontroller,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 810–820, Aug. 2024. [26] R. Mobarak et al., “A minimal and multi-source recording setup for ankle joint kinematics estimation during walking using only proximal information from lower limb,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 32, pp. 812–821, 2024. [27] A. Tigrini et al., “Phasor-based myoelectric synergy features: A fast hand- crafted feature extraction scheme for boosting performance in gait phase recognition,” Sensors, vol. 24, no. 17, 2024, Art. no. 5828. [28] P . Slade, M. J. Kochenderfer, S. L. Delp, and S. H. Collins, “Personalizing exoskeleton assistance while walking in the real world,” Nature, vol. 610, no. 7931, pp. 277–282, 2022. [29] R. Mobarak et al., “Neuromechanical-driven ankle angular position control during gait using minimal setup and LSTM model,” in Proc. 2024 IEEE Int. Symp. Med. Meas. Appl. , 2024, pp. 1–6. [30] Z. Wang et al., “Knee ﬂexion-assisted method for human-exoskeleton system,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 31, pp. 2800–2808, 2023. [31] Y . Ding et al., “Effect of timing of hip extension assistance during loaded walking with a soft exosuit,” J. Neuroengineering Rehabil. , vol. 13, pp. 1–10, 2016. [32] T. Lencioni, I. Carpinella, M. Rabuffetti, A. Marzegan, and M. Ferrarin, “Human kinematic, kinetic and EMG data during different walking and stair ascending and descending tasks,” Sci. Data , vol. 6, no. 1, 2019, Art. no. 309. [33] D. F. Gordon, C. McGreavy, A. Christou, and S. Vijayakumar, “Human- in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance via online simulation of metabolic cost,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 1410–1429, Jun. 2022. [34] B. Chen, C. Zheng, B. Zi, and P . Zhao, “Design and implementation of knee-ankle exoskeleton for energy harvesting and walking assistance,” Smart Mater . Structures, vol. 31, no. 12, 2022, Art. no. 125003. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:57:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.