3830 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 67, NO. 5, MA Y 2020 DMP-Based Motion Generation for a Walking Exoskeleton Robot Using Reinforcement Learning Y uxia Y uan , Zhijun Li , Senior Member, IEEE, Ting Zhao , and Di Gan Abstract—For the purpose of the assistance for human walking, this paper describes a novel coupled move- ment sequences planning and motion adaption based on dynamic movement primitives (DMPs) for a walking exoskeleton robot. The developed exoskeleton robot has eight degrees of freedom (DOFs). The hip and knee of each artiﬁcial leg can provide two electric-powered DOFs to ﬂexion or extension, two passive-installed DOFs of the ankle are to achieve the motion of inversion/eversion and plantarﬂexion/dorsiﬂexion, and two passive DOFs of the hip are to achieve the motion of roll or yaw. A novel trajectory-learning scheme based on reinforcement learning (RL) combined with DMPs is presented for a lower limb exoskeleton robot, aiming to give assistance to human walking. In the proposed strategy, a two-level planning is designed. In the ﬁrst level, the inverted pendulum approximation under the consideration of the locomotion parameters is utilized to guarantee the zero-moment point within the ankle joint of the support leg in the phase of single support. In the second level, the joint trajectories are modeled and learned by DMPs. Meanwhile, the RL is adopted to learn the trajectories for eliminating the effects of uncertainties in joint space. The experiment involving four subjects based on a lower limb exoskeleton robot demonstrates that the proposed scheme can effectively suppress the disturbances and uncertainties. Index Terms —Dynamic movement primitives (DMP), exoskeleton robot, locomotion trajectory, reinforcement learning (RL). Manuscript received April 5, 2018; revised July 4, 2018 and March 19, 2019; accepted April 23, 2019. Date of publication May 17, 2019; date of current version January 3, 2020. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61573147, Grant 61625303, and Grant 61751310, in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2017YFB- 1302302, in part by the Guangdong Science and T echnology Research Collaborative Innovation Projects under Grant 2014B090901056, Grant 2015B020214003, and Grant 2016A020220003, in part by the Guang- dong Science and T echnology Plan Project (Application T echnology Re- search Foundation) under Grant 2015B020233006, and in part by the An- hui Science and T echnology Major Program under Grant 17030901029. (Corresponding author: Zhijun Li.) Y . Y uan, T . Zhao, and D. Gan are with the College of Automa- tion Science and Engineering, South China University of T echnol- ogy , Guangzhou 510641, China (e-mail: , yuxia.yuan2@outlook.com; zt20102011@163.com; linhangd@163.com). Z. Li is with the Department of Automation, University of Science and T echnology of China, Hefei 200030, China (e-mail: , zjli@ieee.org). Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIE.2019.2916396 I. I NTRODUCTION E XOSKELETON can be described as a wearable robot. By combining human intelligence with robot strength and endurance, exoskeleton becomes an integrated system of human and machine [1]–[16]. It can achieve the transfer of mechanical power and sensing signals between the human and robotic machines. In [17], the author presented a comprehensive survey of the recent development of the human-centered intelligent robot and discussed the issues and challenges in the ﬁeld. A lower limb exoskeleton called hybrid assistive limb for individ- uals with gait disorders had been described in [1]–[3]. Also, a hybrid control system had been proposed, which consists of two controllers, including an autonomous posture controller as well as a power-assist controller. In [10], a mathematical framework called integral admittance shaping was proposed to determine the desired dynamic response of a human-limb exoskeleton system, and to synthesize an exoskeleton controller capable of realizing the desired response. In [11], based on electroen- cephalogram signals acquired from the sensorimotor cortical areas of humans, a brain–machine interface was described to control a lower limb exoskeleton. In [12], a design of a hydraulic lower limb exoskeleton with three locomotion-control methods was described, successfully optimizing mobility and remitting muscle fatigue with the condition of backpack loads. In [16], a six-degrees of freedom (DOF) intrinsically compliant robotic orthosis powered by pneumatic muscle actuators was designed to provide the subjects suffering from spinal cord injuries (SCI) with gait therapy. Experiments presented that the wearers’ lower limbs can track the physiological-gait trajectories well under the control of the chattering-free robust variable structure controller in the minimum compliance tracking mode. In [18], a powered lower limb exoskeleton was described to provide the SCI individuals with gait assistance by providing assistant torques at hip and knee joints. A exoskeleton was developed in [19], which allowed subjects to walk at a high speed without the help of auxiliary support/assistive tools. In [20], a human-exoskeleton system was designed by using the nonlinear constraint optimization of a full-order dynamic system, which is based on a mathematical hybrid dynamic model and a dynamic and viable periodic walking gait with different speeds. Then, a controller based on centralized hybrid zero dynamics was implemented on the exoskeleton subsystem. However, the above works seldom consider 0278-0046 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. YU A Net al.: DMP-BASED MOTION GENERATION FOR A WALKING EXOSKELETON ROBOT USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 3831 T ABLE I COMP ARISON OF PREVIOUS WORKS WITH THE PROPOSED APPROACH IN THE PAPER movement sequences planning and adaption for a lower limb exoskeleton. There exist different approaches widely studied for the lower limb exoskeleton generating various stable trajectories. Al- though the nonlinear constraint optimization for the full-order dynamic system had been described in [20], it is well known that its optimization needs lots of computation resources and brings the difﬁculties for real-time control loop. Therefore, it is necessary to propose a simple and effective locomotion tra- jectory of the walking exoskeleton robots. Kajita [21] proposed the linear inverted pendulum model (LIPM) [22]–[24]. In [25], a reference-generation algorithm based on the LIPM and mov- ing support foot zero-moment point (ZMP) references was pro- posed. In [26], authors proposed a method to simulate human gait motion when muscles are weakened, which is based on the enhanced version of three-dimensional linear inverted pendulum model. However, during the walking of the robotic exoskeleton, it is desirable that the robot can adapt trajectories by using the information feedback. However, the external perturbations, lack of information, and errors in the perception of the environment might make the traditional walking, planning to deviate from the desired actions. Therefore, it is necessary to consider these perturbations in trajectory generation to make it adapt to the task requirements. We summarized some previous studies and illustrated innovations of the approach proposed in this paper as shown in Table I. In [27]–[31], DMPs have become a parameterized locomo- tion strategy for trajectory simulation and learning because of continuity, robustness, and linearity of the readjusted parame- T ABLE II MOTION AND DOFSO F EXOSKELETON LEG ters. DMPs consist of several second-order differential equa- tions. One property of DMPs is that disturbances and feedback conditions are considered in particular motion trajectories de- scription or generation whether they are in task or joint space. In addition, it has robustness to perturbations and universality of the trajectory. By developing the especial property of DMPs, a lower limb exoskeleton is able to learn the desired trajecto- ries which form human-like movement sequences. So far, to our knowledge, there are no studies of DMPs for walking exoskele- ton robots. This paper describes a novel coupled movement sequences planning and adaption based on DMPs for walking exoskeleton robot. A continuous gait trajectory based on LIMP model is ﬁrst designed, which assumes that the center of mass is in the torso while ignoring the mass distribution of all other places. Thus, the ZMP is kept within the ankle and there is no need for ankle torque. Then, the designed trajectories of the center of mass are regarded as the reference trajectories, DMPs are employed to model the joint trajectories, however, DMPs are insensitive to perturbations and the ability of generalization of the trajectory learning. By exploiting the reinforcement learning (RL) improvement with path integrals (PI 2 ), walking exoskele- ton can imitate and learn the trajectory of the given walking task, and represent and generate motion sequences. Until now, to the authors best knowledge, there is no work investigating movement sequences planning and adaption in depth for walk- ing exoskeleton. II. E XOSKELETON LEG SYSTEM The developed system is composed of eight-DOFs. Table II summarizes the joints of the exoskeleton system and their cor- responding DOFs and motions. The exoskeleton leg generates the movements of the hip, knee, and ankle joints of both legs. Fig. 1 shows each of the two hip joints with two DOFs—one active DOF (Hip_L2 and Hip_R2) for ﬂexion and extension in the sagittal plane, and one passive DOF (Hip_L1 and Hip_R1) for roll and yaw in the coronal plane. Each of two knee joints has one active DOF (Knee_L and Knee_R) for ﬂexion and ex- tension in the sagittal plane. Each ankle joint has one passive DOF (Ankle_L and Ankle_R) for inversion/eversion and plan- tarﬂexion/dorsiﬂexion in the sagittal plane. To keep balance for the robot wearer, electric-powered joints in knee and hip are required. Nevertheless, there is a tradeoff in technology—each of the two ankle joints is passive to generate the balance, active thrust and extra maneuverability. Table III summarizes the D–H parameter of the exoskeleton robot. As shown in Fig. 1, the robotic exoskeleton system requires the human subject using crutches in order to maintain the human Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3832 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 67, NO. 5, MA Y 2020 Fig. 1. Walking exoskeleton leg. Hip_L2 and Knee_L are electric- powered while Hip_L1 and Ankle_L are passive and spring-loaded. Knee_L and Ankle_L are designed as the height of human knee and an- kle joints, and Hip_L is installed on the pelvis. L1 represents the distance from the ankle to the knee. L2 represents the distance from the knee to the hip. L3 represents the distance from the Hip_L2 to the Hip_R2. T o adapt to different heights of the people, the walking exoskeleton adopts a telescopic structure in shank and thigh, and its height adjustment range is from 1.50 to 1.90 m. Also, Hip_L with sliding rails meets the needs of different sizes of people, and its adjustable width reaches 0.44 m. All the above structures are the same for the right leg. The shank braces support for most of the weight of the body while standing and walking, and the thigh braces are used to gently ﬁx the thighs and support the wearer in standing process. T ABLE III D–H P ARAMETER OF THE JOINT Deﬁnition: 1: the ankle of the standing leg; 2: the knee of the standing leg; 3: the hip of the standing leg; 4: the hip of the swing leg; 5: the knee of the swing leg; and 6: the ankle of the swing leg. body stability, such that the static balance of the exoskeleton can be guaranteed. Therefore, the proposed motion generation and learning method is based on the condition of static balance of the exoskeleton. The lower limb exoskeleton robot selects the brushless direct current (dc) motors (e.g., EC90 ﬂat) as the actuators. The motor is equipped with an inductive rotary encoder (2048 counts/turn) and three Hall sensors to measure motor rotation angle and direction. Also, a harmonic reducer is installed in the dc mo- tor so that the motor speed and torque meet the application requirements. In Fig. 2, the exoskeleton robot system consists of four lev- els of architecture, including a lower limb exoskeleton robot, distributed embedded systems (Elmo driver), servo motors, and Fig. 2. Diagram of lower limb exoskeleton robots system. a control computer. In detail, the control architecture is mainly composed of three parts: 1) the walking exoskeleton, sensors, and actuators; 2) a control unit for generating the driving force by exe- cuting certain algorithms in real time, and an acquisition card for providing a communication interface between the controller, the sensors, and the actuators; 3) a host computer used to run the exoskeleton robot soft- ware application. The exoskeleton is controlled by a low-level controller named Elmo driver connecting to a Windows XP control computer, which executes real-time task via controller area network (CAN) bus. A software application is developed in Visual C++ language by the authors for providing interfaces to control algorithms, and dynamic link libraries (DLLs) are also developed by the authors for the communication with the low-level controller (CANOpen protocol wired CAN bus). Through the interfaces, not only real-time monitoring and analysis of data, but also real- time adjustment of system parameters can be realized during the experiment. There are ﬁve fundamental purposes for the software application development: 1) to monitor and validate the control strategies; 2) for data analysis (strategies performance, system param- eters, acquired statistics); 3) to save the wearer’s test data like clinical anthropometric information; 4) to extract data of the exoskeleton, such as position, an- gular velocity and acceleration, sample frequency of the target personal computer, motor torque, and power. Then, saving the data for off-line analysis in the future. Three levels of security measures are taken—mechanical, electrical, and software. In mechanical designs, the physical status indicator switch prevents excessive excursion of the seg- ments, which may cause the joints to over-extend or deform. Electrical safety measures are mainly reﬂected in three emer- gency stop switches—an enable button, which stops the com- mand signals of servo motors when released. There are two main power emergency switches—one for the observer and the other for the wearer used by foot. In an ideal case, the above-mentioned security measures will not work, because the software has adequate security. And the redundant position sen- sors (Hall effect sensor shaft encoder) mounted at either end of Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. YU A Net al.: DMP-BASED MOTION GENERATION FOR A WALKING EXOSKELETON ROBOT USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 3833 Fig. 3. Deﬁnition of used parameters. the power train are used to monitor joint movements and servo motor positions. Brakes on the movement of the hip and knee will occur when a shutdown request is generated by any safety subsystem. Also, current limitations of motors are controlled by a software to restrict motor torques. III. W ALKING TRAJECTORY GENERA TION The objective of walking trajectory planning is to utilize hu- man locomotion parameters, such as the intermediate foot lift, the walking speed, and the step length. To guarantee the ZMP within the ankle joint during the single support phase, the in- verted pendulum model is adopted in the trajectory planning. During the single support phase, the hip locomotion is treated as an inverted pendulum model. Since the ankle has a passive DOF, the ankle torque is not considered, so as to ensure the ZMP staying within the ankle joint. Consider small tilt angles, e.g., θ ≃ sin θ, in the hip locomotion, the inverted pendulum model can be described in Fig. 3 as mL 2 ¨θ− mgLθ=0 (1) where L denotes the length from the foot point to the center of gravity (COG), and m denotes the exoskeleton mass. In Fig. 3, λn −1 is the step length andλn is designed by human beforehand, and the step length λn −1 can be calculated by the joint angles acquired via the previous swing phase. The single support phase accounts for 70% of the whole step duration, which corresponds to human low-speed walking [34]. The starting angleθss (0) and the ending angle θss (tend ss ) are described by θ(0) = −asin ( 0.7λn −1 2L ) ,θ (tend ss )= asin ( 0.7λn 2L ) (2) where tend ss is the single support phase duration as tend ss = 0.7λn −1 +0 .7λn 2v (3) where v denotes the average horizontal velocity of the hip. With a desiredθ(0) and ˙θ(0) as the initial conditions, the hip trajectory can be calculated by (1) θss (t)= θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2 e t T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) 2 e −t T c (4) with Tc = √ L/g.A t tend ss , the ending condition (3) is achieved. The velocity and acceleration of θ are obtained by (4) as ˙θss (t)= θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2Tc e t T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2Tc e −t T c (5) ¨θss (t)= θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2T2c e t T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) 2T2c e −t T c (6) The hip position, velocity, and acceleration in Cartesian coordinates are described by x(t)= Lsin(θss (t)) ˙x(t)= Lcos(θss (t)) ˙θss (t) ¨x(t)= Lcos(θss (t))¨θss (t) − Lsin(θss (t)) ˙θss (t)2 y(t)= Lcos(θss (t)) ˙y(t)= − Lsin(θss (t)) ˙θss (t) ¨y(t)= − Lsin(θss (t))¨θss (t) − Lcos(θss (t)) ˙θss (t)2 which can guarantee that the COG would be located in the ankle joint of the support foot. After the double support phase, the COG would be shifted to another support foot in the next step. During the double support phase, the position, velocity, and acceleration of the hip should be continuous, so as to connect the previous and the current phases. The angle during the double support phase is deﬁned as θ DS (t), then, ˙θDS (t), and ¨θDS (t) becomes θDS (t)= − ( θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζ2 e ζt T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζ2 e −ζt T c ) + ( ˙θ(0) + θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζTc + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2ζTc ) t + θ(0) + θDS (0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζ2 + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2ζ2 + −4aextra t2 end DS t4 12 + 4aextra tend DS t3 6 (7) ˙θDS (t)= − ( θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζTc e ζt T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2ζTc e −ζt T c ) + ˙θ(0) + θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2ζTc + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2ζTc + −4aextra t2 end DS t3 3 + 4aextra tend DS t2 2 (8) ¨θDS (t)= − ( θ(0) +Tc ˙θ(0) 2T2c e ζt T c + θ(0) − Tc ˙θ(0) −2T2c e −ζt T c ) + −4aextra t2 end DS t2 + 4aextra tend DS t (9) Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3834 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 67, NO. 5, MA Y 2020 where tend DS = 0.3λn ζv , a = θ(tend ss ) − asin(0.7λn 2L + 0.3λn L ), aextra = 3( ˙θnext SS (0) − ˙θ(0)) 2tend DS , ˙θnext SS (0) can be calculated by (5), ζ is a factor used to decrease the double support time for guar- anteeing the continuity of ˙θDS (t) when t = 0. Compared with the single support phase, tend DS is shorter at the end of double support phase and designed as tend DS = 0.3λn v . During the dou- ble support phase, the two feet distance (λn ) would be constant; so, we can have θ(0) = −asin(0.7λn 2L ). Two third-order polynomial functions have been utilized to parameterize the joint trajectory. Att = tend SS /2, the swing foot is lifted to the heightK using the chosen intermediate condition. In the beginning of the single support phase, the chosen bound- ary conditions are written as xfoot (0) = −λn −1 , ˙xfoot (0) = 0, ¨xfoot (0) = 0, yfoot (0) = 0, ˙yfoot (0) = 0, ¨yfoot (0) = 0.A tt h e end of the single support phase, the chosen boundary conditions are xfoot (tend SS )= λn , yfoot (tend SS )=0 . The trajectory plan- ning of the feet and hip is designed in the task space, and four motors of the hip and knee joints can obtain the corresponding trajectories by inverse kinematics, which can be regarded as sample sets for establishing DMP model [32], [33]. The walk- ing trajectory can be divided into two parts, the ﬁrst part is that the swing foot leaves the ground to the highest point, and the second part is that the swing foot moves from the highest point to the landing point. Therefore, the trajectory of each joint can be partitioned into two segments, and we need to build double DMP models for each joint trajectory segment. IV . R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING WITH DYNAMIC MOVEMENT PRIMITIVES A. Dynamic Movement Primitives The DMPs are ﬂexible representations for motion primitives [27] and [31], being described as 1 ς˙zt = αz (βz (g − yt) − zt)+ ft (10) 1 ς˙yt = zt (11) 1 ς˙xt = − αxxt (12) ft = hT t (ω + εt) (13) where zt and xt denote internal states. yt and ˙yt are joint tra- jectory position and velocity. The parameters αz , βz , αx , and ς are scale factors. The parameters ω decide the shape of joint lo- comotion trajectory, and the joint trajectory is [¨qt, ˙qt,qt]T .T h e parameter g is the goal that affects the conﬁguration of the lo- comotion in the end, like the ﬁnal joint positions. ft indicates a nonlinear function which allows the generation of random com- plex locomotion, and ht ∈ Rζ×1 is a linear segmented function approximator containing Gaussian weighting kernels Ψ as ht = ∑N i=1 Ψixt ∑N i=1 Ψi (g − y0) (14) Ψi =e x p ( − 1 2σi (xt − ci)2 ) (15) where σi and ci denote the width and center, respectively. The function ft is in connection with a phase variable xt . The nonlinear function ft determines the shape of the joint trajectory of the hip and knee, which can affect the robot’s walking. It can ensure that the motion of the exoskeleton is stable and smooth. B. Stability It is well known that a globally stable second-order linear system is described in (10) only if f t =0 , and the system be- comes a critical damping system to ensure thatyt monotonically converges to the target point g with the choice of suitable αz and βz [27]. To achieve high robustness under disturbances of the environmental interaction process and to avoid explicit time dependency, an additional standard kinetic system (12) is introduced. From (12), with initial state x t=0 =1 ,w eh a v e xt = e−ςαx t and we obtain xt→∞ =0 . Then from (14), we can see that ht =0 when xt→∞ =0 , that is ht→∞ =0 . According to (13), we have ft→∞ =0 , and (10) becomes 1 ς˙zt = αz (βz (g − yt) − zt). Combining the above equation and (11), we have ¨yt + ςαz ˙yt + ς2αz βz yt = ς2αz βz g. By selecting βz = αz /4 and the initial state yt=0 = y0, ˙yt=0 = 0, the solution of the above equation is yt = y0 ( 1+ ςαz 2 t ) e− ςα z 2 t + g ˙yt = ς2α2 z 4 y0te− ςα z 2 t and we have yt→∞ = g and ˙yt→∞ =0 . Thus, it can be seen that (zt,yt,xt) → (0,g, 0) as t →∞ , or in other words, the system will asymptotically converge to g. Besides, in [28] and [29], the dynamical system equations of the DMP were suggested for two hierarchically coupled sys- tems, and each hierarchically coupled system fulﬁlls the crite- rion of contraction stability. According to the contraction theory, we know that any parallel or serial arrangement of the con- traction stable systems will also be contraction stable, which concludes the stability proof. The lower extremity exoskeleton robot proposed in this paper is a multi-DOF dynamic system, which is also applicable to this property, which inherits their sta- bility proof from this theory of shrinkage theory. Therefore, the equilibrium state of the entire system is asymptotically stable and convergent. C. Reinforcement Learning With Optimal Trajectory This paper adopts a strategy named integrated probability- weighted reinforcement learning to achieve the update. For the dynamic system expressed in (10)–(13), let R(ς i) be a ﬁnite horizon cost function for a trajectory ςi starting at time ti in Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. YU A Net al.: DMP-BASED MOTION GENERATION FOR A WALKING EXOSKELETON ROBOT USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 3835 state [xti ,yti ,zti ]T and ending at time tN R(ςi)= φtN + ∫ tN ti rtdt with φtN being a terminal cost at time tN and rt being an immediate cost at time t, and the goal is to ﬁnd the controls ωti :tN that minimize the value function Eςi (R(ςi)), i.e., the expectation taken over all trajectories starting at [xti ,yti ,zti ]T . The immediate cost at time t is considered to be rt = qt + 1 2ωT t ωt where qt is a state-dependent cost function to be designed, and R is the positive semi-deﬁnite weight matrix of the quadratic control cost. In [30], the stochastic optimal control problem above is con- verted to a generalized path integral formulation, and the solu- tion for the formulation in the case of DMPs can be expressed as ωti = ∫ P(ςi)μ(ςi)dςi (16) where P(ςi)= e− 1 λ S (ςi ) ∫ e− 1 λ S (ςi ) dςi is the probability of the trajectory ςi , and μ(ςi)= R −1 ft i f T t i f T t i R −1 ft i εti is local controls, and S(ςi)= φtN + N −1∑ j=i qtj + 1 2 N −1∑ j=i (ωtj + εtj )T × MT tj RMtj (ωtj + εtj ) (17) Mtj = R−1ftj fT tj fT tj R−1ftj (18) with εtj denoting Gaussian white noise. The optimal controls ωti can be found using an iterative up- date procedure. With an initial value ω, random parameters ω + εt are generated at each time step. Taking formula (16) into consideration, for the case of iterative updating, the updating of equation of the parameter vector can be written as [30] ω update ti = ∫ P(ςi)R−1fti fT ti (ω + εti ) fT ti R−1fti dςi = ∫ P(ςi)R−1fti fT ti εti fT ti R−1fti dςi + R−1fti fT ti fT ti R−1fti ω = δωti + R−1fti fT ti fT ti R−1fti ω = δωti + Mti ω (19) δωti = ∫ P(ςi)R−1fti fT ti εti fT ti R−1fti dςi. (20) From (19), we can see that ωupdate ti is time-dependent. To ac- quire one single time-independent parameter vectorωupdate ,t h e vectors ωupdate ti should be averaged over time ti as ωupdate = 1 N N −1∑ t=0 ωupdate ti = 1 N N −1∑ t=0 δωti + 1 N N −1∑ t=0 Mti ωti . (21) Considering that the parameter vector is constant and time independent, (21) can be rewritten by eliminating the project matrix Mti onto the range space of the gti under the metric R−1 as ωupdate = 1 N N −1∑ t=0 δωti + 1 N N −1∑ t=0 ωti = 1 N N −1∑ t=0 δωti + ω (22) where ωupdate is generated by the mean of the δωti and adding the current value of theω in each iteration, then the cost function (17) can be modiﬁed as S(ςi)= φtN + N −1∑ j=i qtj + 1 2 N −1∑ j=i (ω + Mtj εtj )T R(ω + Mtj εtj ). (23) Fig. 4 illustrates a generalized loop of the generalized path integral algorithm. The update process can be summarized in Algorithm 1. And the parameter updating in the Algorithm is the most important part of the policy improvement loop, which can affect the shape of the track to try to get the target trajectory at the last. The key differences between policy improvements with path integrals (PI 2 ) is to combine RL-based DMP with PI2 , where the RL-based DMP can ensure the stability of the system. The update rule of policy is as follows: First, initializ- ing the parameters of the DMP , and adding noise interference ε t to shape parameter ω in the DMP algorithm. While learn- ing the real-time update of the ω value ( Algorithm 1 shows the update rule of the policy), the result of the update causes a change in trajectory parameters y, ˙y, and ¨y, the correspond- ing cost function S also changes, and then the next update is entered. With the increase in the number of updates, the cost function is gradually reduced and stabilized at a certain value, and the DMP system eventually tends to be a noise-free system. The cost function of the PI 2 is R = φtN + ∑N −1 i=0 rti , where φtN presents the square of the difference between the actual position value of the trajectory and the target g plus the square of the actual velocity in the limit time. The relationship between rti w and the noise εt is as follows: φtN = QN (qt − g)T (qt − g)+ RN ˙qt T ˙qt (29) rt = 1 2Qq ¨qt T ¨qt + 1 2R(ω + εt)T (ω + εt) (30) where QN and RN are used to adjust the range of the immediate cost, and Qq , R to change the terminal cost, qt means the actual position value of the joint, and ˙qt is the actual velocity value of the joint. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3836 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 67, NO. 5, MA Y 2020 Algorithm 1: The Update Rule. Given: 1) Initialization of a cost function rt = qt + ωT Rw, terminal cost φtN 2) A stochastic parameterized policy Δ t = ω + εt 3) Noise with the variance mean is zero: εt 4) Initial state of the parameter ω, δωti is weighted averaging. Repeat until converges of the total cost of the trajectory R: 1) For k =1 ,...,K , calculate Eq. (24) and Eq. (26). P(τi,k )= exp(−1 λS(τi,k )) ∑K m=1 exp(−1 λS(τi,m )) (24) S(τi,k )= φti ,k + N −1∑ j=i+1 qtj ,k + N −1∑ j=i+1 (Mk )T RMk (25) Mtj ,k = R−1gtj ,k gT j ,k gT j ,k R−1gtj ,k (26) where P(τi,k ) is the probability, and Mk = ω + Mtj ,k εtj ,k , S(τi,k ) indicates the path cost. 2) For i =1 ,..., (N − 1), calculate Eq. (27). δωti = K∑ k=1 P(τi,k )Mti ,k εti ,k . (27) 3) Calculate [δω]j = ∑N −1 i=1 (N − i)ψj,t i [δωti ]j ∑N −1 i=0 (N − i)ψj,t i . (28) 4) Update ω using ω + δω 5) Create a noise-free track to check the cost of the trajectory R = φtN + ∑N −1 i=0 rti . Because of the noise and its impact, the output of the control system is random. Multiple tracks need to do an average operation to evaluate the convergence of the parameter cost after the update of R is ﬁnished. D. Reinforcement Learning With Optimal Target In the DMP algorithm, ω is mixed with noise interference so that ω will attach a random variable. Therefore, the process of updating the parameter vector ωupdate is to realize that DMP system can eventually become a noise-free system. However, constraints between joints can cause positional disturbances of the goal; so, we need to learn the goal exploration by the DMP parameter optimization. The goal and trajectory exploration are both extended as 1 ς˙gt = αg (g + {ϵg }k − gt) (31) 1 ς˙zt = α(β(gt − yt) − ˙yt)+ hT t (ω + {εt } k ). (32) As for the target exploration, Gaussian noiseϵg with the variance δg and the center cg is added. If the value of the αg is large Fig. 4. Updating parameters according to the reinforcement learning. enough, then the target state gt will converge immediately to g + ϵg k as P(ς0,k )= exp(−1 λS(ς0,k )) ∑K n=1 exp(−1 λS(ς0,n )) (33) δg= K∑ k=1 [P(ς0,k ) ϵg k ] (34) gupdate = g + δg (35) where P(ς0,k ) is the probability computed by the trajectory cost, which is equal to (24) when t =0 . Probability-weighted averaging (34) and goal updating (35) follow a similar procedure when updating ω. Besides, because double DMP models are established, it is necessary to set two targets corresponding to two stages. V. E XPERIMENT ALVERIFICA TION Experiments have been conducted to verify the proposed tra- jectory learning scheme. We ﬁrst design a continuous, sample- gait trajectory based on LIMP model so as to ensure that the ZMP is kept in ankle. Then, the DMP models can be built up to learn the corresponding joint trajectory, while the RL algorithm optimizes the joint trajectory parameters and eliminates the un- known disturbances from the environment and robot itself, such as joint frictions and unknown payload, to make the lower limb exoskeleton walking smooth and stable. In the experiment, three feature points including the ground contact point, the landing point, and the foot-lifted height point in task space are predeﬁned. Then, the gait trajectory is divided into two trajectories in task space. The starting point of the ﬁrst part is the swing leg grounding point, and the ending point is the foot-lifted height point. For the second part, the starting point is the foot-lifted height point, and the ending point is the landing point of the swing leg. The corresponding value in joint space can be obtained using inverse kinematics. With the three points above, two pieces of joint trajectories are modeled and learned by the DMPs. Finally, these two joint trajectories are combined to form a continuous trajectory. The experiment was conducted in Guangdong Work Injury Rehabilitation Hospital, and Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval of the hospital was obtained for the experiment. The developed trajectory learning scheme has been veriﬁed by four Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. YU A Net al.: DMP-BASED MOTION GENERATION FOR A WALKING EXOSKELETON ROBOT USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 3837 T ABLE IV EXPERIMENT PARAMETERS AND RESUL TS healthy subject volunteers (two men and two women). Their age ranged from 20 to 50 years, and their height ranged from 1.55 to 1.80 m. A. Parameter Setting of the Experiments In the experiment, the cost function is deﬁned as S(ςi)= φtN + ∫ tN ti (rt + 1 2 ωT t Rωt)dt, where φtN denotes terminal cost at tN , and φtN = QN (qt − g)T (qt − g)+ RN ˙qT t ˙qt , qt and ˙qt denote the actual position and angular velocity, respectively. The formula rt + 1 2 ωT t Rωt denotes time cost, with rt = 1 2 (Qq ¨qT t ¨qt) and ωt = ω + εt . Since the lower limb exoskeleton arrives at the lift height g1 , each joint’s angle values can be deﬁned as [q1,q2,q3,q4]T , and each joint’s angle with the ending point g2 is [q11 ,q22 ,q33 ,q44 ]T . Therefore, the parameters of the mid- dle point and the ending point form the serialized DMP model. Given the starting position and the ending through the inverted pendulum system, after several experiments, satisfactory results have been achieved. The experimental parameters and experi- mental results are shown in Table IV. B. Experimental Results In the experiment, the trajectory learning of all the joints in the lower limb exoskeleton are updated simultaneously, and the number of updates was set to 80 times. The DMP produced the desired joint trajectories since each update is completed; then, the actual joint trajectories were obtained. The data from the actual joint trajectories was regarded as the value of PI 2 algorithm to calculate the corresponding cost value, and the shape and target parameters were all updated, then the DMP algorithm with the updated shape and target parameters were used to generate new desired joint trajectories for the lower limb exoskeleton. Such a loop iteration continues 80 times. The experimental results are presented inFigs. 5–7, and Fig. 5 show the actual learning trajectories of four joints in the lower limb exoskeleton. To clearly show the effect of learning, we sampled the data every ten times and obtained seven groups of data. Each joint trajectory is composed of two segments, that is, actually two sequence points; it can be seen that the joint trajectories of the initial time have larger state errors when com- pared with the undisturbed states because of the environmental disturbances. Finally, through continuous learning, they achieved a stable convergence in Fig. 5 . According to the ex- perimental result, it is obvious that the uncertainties and distur- bances can be suppressed by reinforcement learning algorithm. Fig. 5. Actual learning trajectories of four joints. (a) T rajectory of joint2. (b) T rajectory of joint3. (c) T rajectory of joint4. (d) T rajectory of joint5. Fig. 6. T otal cost during reinforcement learning of the experiment. Fig. 6 shows the evolution of the total costs for the four joints. After 30 iterations, its amplitude gradually stabilizes and con- verges with the increase of the update times, which veriﬁes the PI 2 algorithm learning performance and indicates that the joint trajectories are convergent. Combining the previous analysis, the shape parameter ω and the target parameter g have been added with random distur- bances, while the PI2 algorithm can update the parameters effec- tively and eliminate the perturbation. Fig. 7 shows the learned Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 3838 IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON INDUSTRIAL ELECTRONICS, VOL. 67, NO. 5, MA Y 2020 Fig. 7. Desired trajectory and the actual trajectory of foot, knee, and hip in the cartesian space within ﬁve steps. The full line stands for the desired trajectory , and the dotted line stand for the actual trajectory . (a) Initial state of the swing leg. (b) Initial state of the support leg. (c) End state of the support leg. (d) End state of the swing leg. Fig. 8. Walking gait of the subject. trajectories for the exoskeleton in the Cartesian space. From Fig. 7, we can see that the lower limb exoskeleton can achieve smooth and stable walking. Besides, we can ﬁnd the trajectory that is smooth without any dramatic perturbation, which has been veriﬁed by the subjects that the assistive walking by the lower limb exoskeleton is comfortable. Finally,Fig. 8 shows the video snapshots of one subject. These ﬁgures indicate that the lower limb exoskeleton can assist a human subject to achieve stable walking. VI. C ONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed a novel method which could as- sist human subjects to walk steadily while wearing lower limb exoskeleton robots. The major mechanical structure of the ex- oskeleton robot that can provide eight DOFs and the exoskeleton robots system were described. The novel method included two aspects. On the one hand, we proposed a walking trajectory planning method for the lower extremity exoskeleton robot. On the other hand, based on the proposed trajectory, we utilized the DMP strategy based on reinforcement learning to transform the trajectory of the task space to the trajectory of angle space, which could reduce the impact from the outside system and all perturbations. From the experiment, we could see that the switch of the standing leg and the swing leg is smooth, and under the participation of DMP algorithm based on reinforcement learn- ing, the trajectories of the exoskeleton robot could be constantly adjusted and the target trajectory was traced smoothly. R EFERENCES [1] H. Kawamoto, S. Kanbe, and Y . Sankai, “Power assist method for HAL-3 estimating operators intention based on motion information,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human Interact. Commun. , Millbrae, CA, USA, 2003, pp. 67–72. [2] H. Kawamoto and Y . Sankai, “Power assist method based on phase se- quence driven by interaction between human and robot suit,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Robot Human Interact. Commun. , Okayama, Japan, 2004, pp. 491–496. [3] H. Kawamoto and Y . Sankai, “Power assist system HAL-3 for gait disorder person,” inComputers Helping People With Special Needs,N e wY o r k ,N Y , USA: Springer, 2002, pp. 196–203. [4] J. Huang, X. Tu, and J. He, “Design and evaluation of the RUPERT wearable upper extremity exoskeleton robot for clinical and in-home ther- apies,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 926–935, Jul. 2016. [5] B. Brahmi, M. Saad, M. H. Rahman, and C. Ochoa-Luna, “Cartesian trajectory tracking of a 7-DOF exoskeleton robot based on human inverse kinematics,”IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 600– 611, Mar. 2019. [6] Z. Li, C. Y ang, and E. Burdet, “An overview of biomedical robotics and bio-mechatronics systems and applications,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 869–874, Jul. 2016. [7] K. Y amamoto, K. Hyodo, M. Ishii, and T.Matsuo,“Development of power assisting suit for assisting nurse labor,” JSME Int. J. Ser . C., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 703–711, Sep. 2002. [8] L. Lunenburger, G. Colombo, and R. Riener, “Biofeedback for robotic gait rehabilitation,” J. Neuroeng. Rehabil. , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–11, 2007. [9] S. Komada, Y . Hashimoto, N. Okuyama, T. Hisada, and J. Hirai, “Devel- opment of a biofeedback therapeutic-exercise-supporting manipulator,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 3914–3920, Oct. 2009. [10] U. Nagarajan, G. Aguirre-Ollinger, and A. Goswamic, “Integral admit- tance shaping: A uniﬁed framework for active exoskeleton control,”Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 75, pp. 310–324, 2016. [11] K. Lee, D. Liu, L. Perroud, R. Chavarriaga, and J. R. Millana, “A brain- controlled exoskeleton with cascaded event-related desynchronization classiﬁers,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 90, pp. 15–23, 2017. [12] H. Kim, Y . J. Shin, and J. Kim, “Design and locomotion control of a hy- draulic lower extremity exoskeleton for mobility augmentation,” Mecha- tronics, vol. 46, pp. 32–45, 2017. [13] Z. Li, B. Huang, Z. Y e, M. Deng, and C. Y ang, “Physical human-robot interaction of a robotic exoskeleton by admittance control,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 9614–9624, Dec. 2018. [14] Z. Li, B. Huang, A. Ajoudani, C. Y ang, C. Su, and A. Bicchi, “Asymmetric bimanual control of dual-arm exoskeletons for human-cooperative manip- ulations,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 264–271, Feb. 2018. [15] Z. Li, T. Zhao, F. Chen, Y . Hu, C. Su, and T. Fukuda, “Reinforcement learn- ing of manipulation and grasping using dynamical movement primitives for a humanoid like mobile manipulator,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron- ics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 121–131, Feb. 2018. [16] S. Hussain, S. Q. Xie, and P . K. Jamwal, “Robust nonlinear control of an intrinsically compliant robotic gait training orthosis,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 655–665, May 2013. [17] W. He, Z. Li, and C. L. P . Chen, “A survey of human-centered intelligent robots: Issues and challenges,” IEEE/CAA J. Automatica Sinica ,v o l .4 , no. 4, pp. 602–609, 2017. [18] R. J. Farris, H. A. Quintero, and M. Goldfarb, “Preliminary evaluation of a powered lower limb orthosis to aid walking in paraplegic individuals,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 652–659, Dec. 2011. [19] Z. Ren, C. Deng, K. Zhao, and Z. Li, “The development of a high speed lower-limb robotic exoskeleton,” Sci. China Inf. Sci., vol. 62, no. 5, 2019, Art. no. 50202. [20] A. Agrawal et al., “First steps towards translating HZD control of bipedal robots to decentralized control of exoskeletons,” IEEE Access ,v o l .5 , pp. 9919–9934, 2017. [21] S. Kajita and K. Tani, “Study of dynamic biped locomotion on rugged terrain–derivation and application of the linear inverted pendulum mode,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. , Sacramento, CA, USA, 1991, pp. 1405–1411. [22] Z. Y u et al., “Gait planning of omnidirectional walk on inclined ground for biped robots,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst. , vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 888–897, Jul. 2016. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. YU A Net al.: DMP-BASED MOTION GENERATION FOR A WALKING EXOSKELETON ROBOT USING REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 3839 [23] M. Shahbazi, B. Robert, and G. A. D. Lopes, “Uniﬁed modeling and control of walking and running on the spring-loaded inverted pendulum,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 1178–1195, Oct. 2016. [24] I. Poulakakis and J. W. Grizzle, “The spring loaded inverted pendulum as the hybrid zero dynamics of an asymmetric hopper,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1779–1793, Sep. 2009. [25] K. Erbatur and O. Kurt, “Natural ZMP trajectories for biped robot refer- ence generation,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 835–845, Mar. 2009. [26] T. Komura, A. Nagano, H. Leung, and Y . Shinagawa, “Simulating patho- logical gait using the enhanced linear inverted pendulum Model,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 1502–1513, Sep. 2005. [27] F. Stulp, E. A. Theodorou, and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning with sequences of motion primitives for robust manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 1360–1370, Dec. 2012. [28] B. E. Perk and J. J. E. Slotine, “Motion primitives for robotic ﬂight control,” 2008, arXiv:cs/0609140. [29] W. Lohmiller and J. J. Slotine, “On contraction analysis for nonlinear systems,” Automatica, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 683–696, 1998. [30] E. Theodorou, J. Buchli, and S. Schaal, “A generalized path integral control approach to reinforcement learning,”J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 3137–3181, 2010. [31] C. L. Bottasso, D. Leonello, and B. Savini, “Path planning for autonomous vehicles by trajectory smoothing using motion primitives,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1152–1168, Nov. 2008. [32] R. H. Castain and R. P . Paul, “An on-line dynamic trajectory generator,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 68–72, 1984. [33] Schaal et al., “Learning movement primitives,” in Proc. 11th Int. Symp. Robot. Res., Siena, Italy, 2003, pp. 561–572. [34] B. V anderborght et al. , “Objective locomotion parameters based in- verted pendulum trajectory generator,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 738–750, 2008. Yu x i a Yu a nreceived the bachelor’s degree in automation from the College of Electrical and Information Engineering, Hunan University , Changsha, China, in 2017. She is currently working toward the M.S. degree in control the- ory and control engineering with the South China University of T echnology , Guangzhou, China. Her research interests include noninvasive brain computer interface, brain controlled mo- bile robot, and deep learning. Zhijun Li (M’07–SM’09) received the Ph.D. degree in mechatronics, Shanghai Jiao T ong University , Shanghai, China, in 2002. From 2003 to 2005, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of Mechanical En- gineering and Intelligent systems, University of Electro-Communications, T okyo, Japan. From 2005 to 2006, he was a Research Fellow with the Department of Electrical and Computer En- gineering, National University of Singapore, and Nanyang T echnological University , Singapore. Since 2012, he has been a Professor of Robotics with the College of Automation Science and Engineering, South China University of T ech- nology , Guangzhou, China. Since 2017, he has been a Professor of Robotics with the Department of Automation, University of Science and T echnology , Hefei, China. His current research interests include wear- able robotics, tele-operation systems, nonlinear control, neural network optimization, etc. Dr. Li has been the Co-Chair of IEEE SMC T echnical Committee on Biomechatronics and Biorobotics Systems ( B 2 S) and IEEE-RAS T ech- nical Committee on Neuro-Robotics Systems. He is currently serving as an Editor-at-large of Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, and as an Associate Editor of several IEEE T ransactions. Ting Zhao received the M.S. degree in control theory and engineering from the School of Au- tomation, Guangdong University of T echnology , Guangzhou, China, in 2009. He is currently pur- suing the Ph.D. degree in control theory and en- gineering with the College of Automation Sci- ence and Engineering, South China University of T echnology , Guangzhou. His current research interests include bionic arms and prosthesis hands, neural network control and optimization. Di Gan received the B.Eng. degree in automa- tion from Jinan University Automation College, Guangzhou, China, in 2015, and the master’s degree in control theory and engineering from the College of Automation Science and Engi- neering, South China University of T echnology , Guangzhou, in 2018. His current research interests include ex- oskeleton robot, fuzzy control and optimization. Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenzhen University of Advanced Technology. Downloaded on June 09,2026 at 13:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.