Contents lists available atScienceDirect Gait & Posture journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/gaitpost Human-in-the-loop optimization of active plantarflexion exoskeleton assistance for one individual with chronic stroke T. Nguyen*, K. Poggensee, A. Voloshina, S. Collins Stanford University, Mechanical Engineering, Stanford, USA 1. Introduction Individuals with chronic stroke often have higher metabolic energy consumption during walking than able-bodied individuals[1]. A soft assistive ankle device, or exosuit, reduced metabolic cost by 10% compared to walking with the device applying no assistance in in- dividuals with chronic stroke[2]. The device appliedpredefined active plantarflexion and dorsiflexion assistance on the paretic side. A different unilateral ankle plantarflexion device, or exoskeleton, has been shown to decrease metabolic energy consumption by about 24% compared to walking with the device applying no assistance in able-bodied individuals with human-in-the-loop optimization[3,4]. Human-in-the-loop optimization identifies user specific assistance strategies in real time based on biological measurements of the user. 2. Research Question Does customized assistance significantly reduce the metabolic cost of walking in one participant with chronic stroke using our active plantarflexion exoskeleton with added passive dorsiflexion assistance? 3. Methods One individual with hemiparesis (male, age 74, 38 months post- stroke) walked on a treadmill at a self-selected speed wearing an ankle exoskeleton on the paretic leg while the optimizer worked to find a customized assistance strategy. The optimizer relied on a genetic al- gorithm where the best assistance strategies from one generation in- form the next generation of strategies to be sampled. Device assistance was optimized over four days of walking. The participant completed four generations during the first two days. The participant was then further trained to more effectively use the device. Optimization was restarted, and threegenerations anda validation test were conducted over the last two days. Metabolic cost and ankle angle werecollected.Ankleanglewasapproximatedusinganencoderlocated coaxially with the ankle joint. 4. Results The participant showed a 5% metabolic energy reduction while walking with the customized controller compared to walking with the device applying no assistance (Fig. 1A). The participant’s peak dorsi- flexion angle in late stance was significantly reduced by about 6° when walking with customized assistance (p<0.001, two-sample t-test) (Fig. 1C&D). Picture 1 - "Experimental Results" 5. Discussion Although the peak torque of the customized assistance was higher than that of the exosuit presented by[2](Fig. 1B), the participant’s energy reduction was lower than the average reduction in[2]. In- dividuals post-stroke often experience drop-foot due to dorsiflexor muscle weakness, so active dorsiflexion could have contributed to ad- ditional energy reductions. The participant did not have voluntary control over knee flexion, which is normally coupled with plantar- flexion during ankle push-off. Due to this, applying greater plantar- flexion torques could have led to higher energy compensatory strate- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2019.07.155 ⁎ Corresponding author. Gait & Posture 73 (2019) 428–429 0966-6362/ © 2019 Published by Elsevier B.V. T gies, such as hip hiking and reduced change in ankle angle at push-off. While dorsiflexion and knee flexion could both help foot clearance in early swing, knee flexion assistance could allow for additional plan- tarflexion at push-off. We are therefore building a knee-ankle exoske- leton. References [1]M.M. Platts, D. Rafferty, L. Paul, “Metabolic cost of overground gait in younger stroke patients and healthy controls,”, Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. vol. 38, (6) (2006) 1041–1046. [2]L.N. Awad, et al., “A soft robotic exosuit improves walking in patientsafter stroke,”, Sci. Transl. Med vol. 9, (400) (2017). [3]J. Zhang, et al., “Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assistance during walking,”, Science (80-. ) vol. 356, (6344) (Jun. 2017) 1280–1284. [4] K. A. Witte, J. Zhang, R. W. Jackson, and S. H. Collins, “Design of two lightweight, high-bandwidth torque-controlled ankle exoskeletons,”Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 2015–June, no. June, pp. 1223–1228, 2015. Fig. 1. experimental results. (A)Metabolic energy cost of walking in normal shoes, the device applying no assistance, and the device applying customized assistance duringvalidation.customized assistancereducedthemetabolic costby5.2%comparedtowalkingwiththedeviceapplying noassistance.the increasein metabolic cost between normal shoes and no assistance is likely due to the added mass of the device.(B)Average assistance profiles for each generation during optimization. The participant-specific assistance boundplaced limits on the possible assistance profiles to ensure safety duringoptimization. The average assistance strategiesfrom[2]isshownforcomparison.(C)Ankleanglemeasuredusingthedeviceencoderwiththedeviceapplyingnoassistanceduringvalidation.(D)Ankle angle measuredusing device encoder with the device applyingthe customized assistance profile duringvalidation. Anglemagnitudes recoreded were dependent on device placement, but the ranges were consistent throughout trials. T. Nguyen, et al. Gait & Posture 73 (2019) 428–429 429