944 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 29, 2021 Selection of Muscle-Activity-Based Cost Function in Human-in-the-Loop Optimization of Multi-Gait Ankle Exoskeleton Assistance Hong Han , Wei Wang , Fengchao Zhang, Xin Li, Jianyu Chen, Jianda Han , and Juanjuan Zhang Abstract — Using “human-in-the-loop” (HIL) optimization can obtain suitable exoskeleton assistance patterns to improve walking economy. However, there are differences in these patterns under different gait conditions, and cur- rently most HIL optimizations use metabolic cost, which requires long periods to be estimated for each control law, as the physiological objective to minimize. We aimed to construct a muscle-activity-based cost function and to ﬁnd the appropriate initial assistance patterns in HIL optimiza- tion of multi-gait ankle exoskeleton assistance. One healthy subject walked assisted by an ankle exoskeleton under nine gait conditions and each condition was the combination of different walking speeds, ground slopes and load weights. Ten assistance patterns were provided for the subject under each gait condition. Then we constructed a cost function based on surface electromyography signals of four lower leg muscles and select the muscle weight combination by using particle swarm optimization algorithm to compose the cost function with maximum differences between different assistance patterns. The mean weights of medial gastroc- nemius, lateral gastrocnemius, soleus and tibialis anterior activity under all gait conditions are 0.153, 0.104, 0.953 and 0.145, respectively.Then we veriﬁed the effectivenessof this cost function by optimization and validation experiments conducted on four subjects. Our results are expected to guide the selection of muscle-activity-based cost functions and improve the time efﬁciency of HIL optimization. Index Terms — “Human-in-the-loop” optimization, multi- gait, ankle exoskeleton, muscle activity, cost function. I. I NTRODUCTION N OW ADA YS, wearable robotic devices, such as exoskele- tons, have been widely used in military, medical and other ﬁelds. They can be used in performance augmentation of able-bodied individuals [1] − [5], rehabilitation training and locomotion assistance [6]. Howe ver, there are a large number Manuscript received December 8, 2020; revised April 16, 2021; accepted May 17, 2021. Date of publication May 20, 2021; date of current version May 28, 2021. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2017YFB1303005, in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61703214 and Grant 62073179, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin under Grant 17JCYBJC40600. (Corresponding author: Juanjuan Zhang.) This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental proc edures and protocols was granted by the Ethical Committee of Nankai University . The authors are with the Tianjin Key Laboratory of Intelligent Robotics, Institute of Robotics and Automatic Information System, Nankai Univer- sity , Tianjin 300350, China (e-mail: juanjuanzhang@nankai.edu.cn). Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSRE.2021.3082198 of tunable controller parameters that dictate their behavior and their interaction with users in the devices, and it is a challenge to identify the best parameters for each individual. “Human-in-the-loop” (HIL) optimization has been employed as a method to tune assistive device parameters on a subject-speciﬁc basis [7]. It is the process of iteratively and automatically generating exoskeleton assistance patterns to minimize a physiological cost function while an individual is using the device. Researchers have been able to obtain suitable exoskeleton assistance patterns during normal walking and have a signiﬁcant improvement on walking economy by HIL optimization [8]− [13]. Although the studies have differed in their optimization algorithms and assistive device hardware, most of them used metabolic cost as the physiological objective to minimize because the amount of human energy consumption can reﬂect whether exoskeleton assistances have a positive effect on human during walking. For example, Zhang et al. used an unilateral ankle exoskeleton to assist plantar ﬂexion during walking in HIL optimization and reduce the metabolic cost of 11 subjects by 24.2 ± 7.4% [9]; Ding et al. designed a bilateral hip exoskeleton which reduced the metabolic cost of 8 subjects by 17.4 ± 3.2% [11]. Cost functions based on human metabolic cost require long evaluation periods and contain substantial noise. An advanced measurement system for metabolic cost is indirect calorimetry, a method which estimates ener getic cost using measurements of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production. The system usually comprises a ﬂowmeter embedded in a rubber mask that covers the nose and mouth, which will cause discomfort if wearing the mask for a long time. While these systems are widely used, they are ill-suited for continuous use or long-term data collections, and current HIL opti- mization protocols still require 2-4 minutes to estimate the metabolic cost for each contro l law [7], [14]. Meanwhile, previous studies showed that th ere were differences in optimal exoskeleton assistance patterns obtained by HIL optimization among different subjects and unde r different gait conditions (different walking speeds, ground slopes and load weights) [9], [11], [13], so it will take much time to get the multi-gait suitable assistance patterns by HIL optimization based on metabolic cost. Therefore, it’s necessary to explore whether other physiological responses can be used as optimization objectives. One reasonable choice is muscle activity, which measured by surface electromyography (EMG) that reﬂects This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribut ion-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ HAN et al.: SELECTION OF MUSCLE-ACTIVITY -BASED COST FUNCTION IN HIL OPTIMIZA TION 945 Fig. 1. Exoskeleton system. It includes a control system, a act uation system, transmissions and an ankle exoskeleton. (A) Control system and actuation system, consisting of a off-boar d real-time controller, a AC servo motor, a planetary gear and a motor driver. (B) T ransmissions. A ﬂexible unidirectional Bowden cable that is composed of a coiled-steel outer condui t and an inner rope is used as the transmission device between the motor and the exoskeleton worn on the leg. A series spring is attached at the end of the rope to improve the transmission compliance. (C) A enlarged schematic of the exoskeleton. (D) A photograph of the exoskeleton. the energy consumption of muscle contraction. Steady EMG signals can be obtained with data collection for less time than using metabolic cost in each cont rol law of HIL optimization. Nowadays, EMG signals have been widely used to control wearable robot devices [15] − [18], [27]], [28], [30]. Appropriate initial parameters of assistance patterns can substantially improve the time efﬁciency of multi-gait HIL optimization, and we can obtain them by ﬁrstly providing a variety of ﬁxed assistance patterns with the individual and analyzing the changes of lower leg muscle activities under dif- ferent assistance patterns for each gait condition. Meanwhile, we can construct a muscle-act ivity-based cost function with the experimental data. Our goal was to construct a muscle-activity-based cost func- tion in HIL optimization of multi-gait exoskeleton assistance and to provide a reference for the initial parameters selections of assistance patterns. We mainly focused on the lower leg muscles around ankle joint. This study was expected to help to evaluate exoskeleton perfo rmance and guide the selection of cost functions in HIL optimization. The results can be also used to improve the time efﬁciency of multi-gait HIL optimization by providing a good initial parameter estimate. II. M ETHODS We ﬁrstly constructed a cost function on the basis of one subject’s EMG signals of 4 lower leg muscles under different ankle exoskeleton assistance patterns under 9 gait conditions in TABL E I. We used statistical methods to identify the best weighted combination of muscle activities that differentiate different assistance the most. Then we recruited four subjects and used our cost function to carry out HIL optimization under different gait conditions to verify its effectiveness. Finally, we calculated cost function values under all gait conditions to provide a reference for the initial parameter identiﬁcation of assistance patterns. All participants were provided with written informed consent before completing the protocol, which was approved by the ethical committee of Nankai University. T ABLE I NINE GAIT CONDITIONS IN EXPERIMENTS A. Exoskeleton System We built an ankle exoskeleton system, including a off-board real-time control system and actuation system, a Bowden cable transmission with a series spring, and an ankle exoskeleton that interacted with the human foot and shank ( Fig. 1 ). We used a real-time control system (DS1202, dSP ACE, Paderborn, GmbH) to sample sensors at 5000 Hz. The motor unit consisted of a AC servo motor, a 5:1 plane- tary gear and a motor driver (BSM90N-175AA, GBSM90- MRP120-5 and MF180-04AN-16A, ABB, Zurich, Swiss). The high-level controller was used to determine the desired torque. The low-level controller commanded desired motor velocity ( Fig. 1A ). A Bowden cable that was composed of a coiled-steel outer conduit and an inner rope was used as the transmission device between the motor and the exoskeleton. A series spring was attached at the end of the rope to improve the transmission compliance ( Fig. 1B ). The exoskele- ton end-effector exerted forces on the front of the shank below the knee, beneath the heel, and on the ground beneath the toes, which produced the ankle plantar ﬂexion torque. A Wheatstone bridge consisting of four strain gauges that were ﬁxed on a 946 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 29, 2021 titanium level behind the heel measured the tension in the drive rope. The exoskeleton was integrated with a running shoe. A footswitch was installed on the sole to sense the instant of heel strike at the beginning of the gait cycle. There was a rope placed to the bottom of the shoe to lift the heel when providing assistive torque. Two digital optical encoders (E5, US Digital, W A, USA) were installed on motor shaft and exoskeleton joint shaft respectively to measure motor position and ankle joint angle ( Fig. 1C , 1D). B. T orque Control We deﬁned the desired exoskeleton plantar ﬂexion assistive torque curve as an unimodal curve ( Fig. 2B ) by mimicking the human internal joint moment ( Fig. 2A ). This method of emulating human torques had been used and proved effec- tive in multiple prior publica tions [9], [13]. The curve was constructed using four parameters: (1) peak time tp ,t h a tw a s normalized to stride period and referred to the time when the exoskeleton provided the maximum assistive torque; (2) peak torque τ p , which referred to the maximum assistive torque provided by the exoskeleton; (3) rise time tr ; (4) fall time t f . One previous study showed that tr and t f had less obvious inﬂuence on the assistance effect of exoskeleton [9], so we took tp and τp as the main assistance parameters and set tr and t f as the average optimization results of 11 subjects in [9]: 22.8% and 11.7%, respectively. The desired assistive torque was tracked using a combina- tion of proportional control, damping injection and iterative learning. The torque control method did not rely on explicit models or integration, which made it suitable for the complex, nonlinear and time-varying dynamics of human interaction with exoskeletons during walking [9]. The desired motor displacement /Delta1θ m,des (i, n) and commanded motor velocity ˙θm,des (i, n) were deﬁned as follows [15], [16]: /Delta1θm,des (i, n) = /Delta1θLRN m,des (i + D, n) − K p · eτ (i, n) − Kd · ˙θm (i.n) /Delta1θLRN m,des (i, n + 1) = β · θLRN m,des (i, n) − Kl · e fl t (i, n) e fl t (i, n) = (1 − μ) · e fl t (i, n − 1) + μ · eτ (i, n) ˙θm,des (i, n) = 1 T · /Delta1θm,des (i, n) (1) where i is the time index or number of control cycles elapsed within this stride. n is this stride and n + 1 is the next stride. D = 0.018 s is the time delay between commanding and achieving a change in motor position. K p = 8 is a proportional gain and Kd = 0.05 is a damping gain. eτ = τ − τdes is torque error, τ is measured exoskeleton torque and τdes is desired exoskeleton torque. θm is measured velocity of the motor pulley. T = 0.05 s is a gain related to the rise time of motor. The controller used the torque error of each step to update the feed-forward trajectory of the desired motor displacement next step. β ∈ [0, 1] is a weight on the learned trajectory. Kl = 0.05 is the iterative learning gain. Noise in the error signal leads to improper updates on the learned trajectory, which can excite unstable ripple formation. It can be reduced by ﬁltering the error signal. e fl t is the ﬁltered torque error Fig. 2. (A) The human internal joint moment during a single gait cycle of ankle in sagittal plane. (B) Parameterization of ankle exoskeleton assistive torque. The assistive torque curve is deﬁned by peak time, peak torque, rise time and fall time. T ABLE II EXPERIMENT SEQUENCE trajectory, and μ ∈ [0, 1] is a weight of learned error. The value of β and μ was 1 in experiments. C. Experimental Protocol In cost function scanning experiments, we designed four groups of exoskeleton assistance walking experiments, includ- ing Level Walking EXP , Uphill Walking EXP , Loaded Walking EXP and Incline Walking EXP . ( TABL E I I). Each group of experiment was completed continuously and the interval of two groups was at least 48 hours to avoid the inﬂuence of fatigue. The walking speed and ground slope were changed by adjusting the speed and tilt angle of the treadmill, respectively. In Loaded Walking EXP , the subject wore a weighted running vest, and the load weight was evenly distributed in the front and back of the trunk. One subject (male, 23 years, 180 cm, 58 kg) wore a right ankle exoskeleton and walked on a treadmill under ten differ- ent assistance patterns: zero torque (ZT), and combinations of three t p and three τp levels (Fig. 3 , p1 to p9) under each gait condition. According to previous studies, the ankle push-off time of most healthy subjects was between 45% and 53% of stride period [18], [20]. Therefore, we set the three t p as 46%, 49% and 52% of stride period, respectively (early, middle and late tp ), which could distinguish different assistance patterns and were close to the optimal tp in previous studies [9]. Considering that too high τp may lead to discomfort during walking, and assistance effects may not be obvious if τp was too small, we set the three τp levels as 20, 35 and 50 N ·m( l o w , HAN et al.: SELECTION OF MUSCLE-ACTIVITY -BASED COST FUNCTION IN HIL OPTIMIZA TION 947 Fig. 3. T en exoskeleton assistance patterns provided for the subject under each gait condition. ZT is zero torque. p1 to p9 is the nine exoskeleton assistance patterns ( tp / τp: 46 / 20, 46 / 35, 46 / 50, 49 / 20, 49 / 35, 49 / 50, 52 / 20, 52 / 35, 52 / 50, % Gait cycle / N ·m). medium and high τp ) after doing the preliminary experimental test and training. We used a wireless EMG system (Bagnoli, Delsys, MA, USA) to measure sEMG signals of four lower leg muscles (medial gastrocnemius: mGAS, l ateral gastrocnemius: lGAS, soleus: SOL and tibialis anterior: TA) on the exoskeleton side. The four muscles we chose are mainly responsible for the plantarﬂexion and dorsiﬂexion movements of ankle joint. We placed EMG sensors in strict conformity with human anatomy, and we used stickers and bandages to make full contact between EMG sensors and the skin surface to avoid sensors falling off or losing contact with the skin during experiments. The wireless EMG system avoided the long-time wearing process and it only took about 5 minutes to wear EMG sensors. The original EMG signals passes through successively a 2nd-order Butterworth high-pass ﬁlter (cut-off frequency of 20 Hz), a full-wave rectiﬁcation and a 2nd-order Butter- worth low-pass ﬁlter (cut-off frequency of 10 Hz). In each group of experiment, all EMG amplitudes after preprocessing were normalized by the maximum under 30 assistance patterns (3 gait conditions × 10 assistance patterns). Our previous study showed that the root-mean-square (RMS) of EMG signals were well corrected with both mean and max values [21]. Meanwhile, it was recognized that a relatively linear relationship existed between RMS and muscle force [32], so RMS of EMG signals were selected as the primary index to estimate muscle activities. We used One-way Analysis of V ariance (ANOV A) to analyze whether muscle activities under 9 assistance patterns reduced signiﬁcantly compared to zero torque for each gait condition, and the signiﬁcance level was set α = 0.05. Before experiments, 3 minutes was used to allow par- ticipants to getting used to wearing exoskeleton and make coarse estimation of t p and τp ranges. In formal experiments, the subject ﬁrstly experienced zero torque pattern, and then was provided with 9 different assistance patterns in a random order. All patterns lasted for 2 minutes to ensure stable muscle activities and we recorded the measured data of the last 60 s in 2 minutes. The results are shown in Fig. 4 . D. Muscle-Activity-Based Cost Function Using the EMG signals of four muscles under different assistance patterns, we constr ucted a muscle-activity-based cost function for multi-gait HIL optimization : CF = g1 · mGAS + g2 · lGAS + g3 · SOL + g4 · TA (2) where, gi (i = 1,..., 4) are the muscle activity weights that need to be optimized and mGAS , lGAS , SOL , TA are RMS of EMG signals of four muscles in each gait cycle. EMG signals need be normalized by the maximum under zero torque condition. When optimizing the muscle weights, we ﬁrst set four mus- cles the same ranges of weights: g 1, g2, g3, g4 ∈[ 0, 1]. Con- sidering the biomechanics and previous studies, GAS and SOL are mainly involved in human walking, running and jumping, so exoskeleton assistances maybe have a positive effect on the reduction of their activities, while TA is mainly used for dorsiﬂexion during walking, and uncomfortable exoskeleton plantarﬂexion assistance will increase its activity. Therefore, we set g 4 ∈[ − 1, 1] to maximize the difference between different assistance patterns. There must be signiﬁcant differences between the CF value in Eq(2) under different assistance patterns. Therefore, we desiged the optimization objective function from the per- spective of statistics to get the optimal muscle activity weight combination. We expressed the cost function by matrix : J m =[ g1 g2 g3 g4]· ⎡ ⎢⎢⎣ mGAS 1 ··· mGAS n lGAS 1 ··· lGAS n SOL 1 ··· SOL n TA 1 ··· TA n ⎤ ⎥⎥⎦ (3) where mGAS n , lGAS n , SOL n and TA n are RMS of EMG signals of four muscles in the nth step. Jm is 1 × n vector depositing cost function values under each assistance pattern. For each gait condition, m = 1,..., 9 (except zero torque) and 36 P-values ( ∑ 8 i=1 i = 36) were obtained by pairwise com- bination independent-samples t-test for J1 to J9. The average of logarithms of 36 P-values was used as the optimization objective J: minimize J = ∑36 j=1 lg(Pj) 36 (4) For the nine gait conditions we set, we all used particle swarm optimization algorithm to minimize the objective J and obtained the optimal muscle activity weight combination. For NW and UW12, we took the average of multiple experiments as the ﬁnal results under this gait condition. Finally, We used the average of weight combin ations under nine gait conditions as the ﬁnal weight combination in optimized cost function. E. Veriﬁcation We recruited four subjects to participate in validation exper- iments under four different gait conditions. The validation experiments included two parts: HIL optimization and results validation. Covariance Matrix Adaptive Evolution Strategy (CMAES) is stochastic, derivative-free, and it works for non-linear and non-convex continuous problems, which are beneﬁcial to our issue, so we used it to minimize the cost function and obtained the optimized assistance pattern. In our previous study, SOL 948 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 29, 2021 Fig. 4. Lower leg muscle activities over the whole stride under different exoskeleton assistance patterns for all gait conditions. (A) Level Walking EXP . (B) Uphill Walkling EXP . (C) Loaded Walking EXP . (D) Incline Walking EXP . Muscle activities were normalized by the average of the 30 maximum values of muscle activities under 30 assistance patterns in each ex periment. Bars and whiskers are means and standard deviations of muscle activities in all steps. ∗ represents that muscle activities reduced signiﬁcantly compared to zero torque. activity reduced more signiﬁcantly compared to other muscles [21], and our ankle exoskele ton mainly replaced SOL con- traction during walking. Theref ore, we carried out validation experiments by comparing the results of HIL optimization based on the optimized cost function which was muscle activity weighted sums (CF-MAWS) with those based on only SOL activity (CF-SOL). The optimization time was a key problem in HIL opti- mization, and previous studies had also conﬁrmed that longer optimization time was not necessa rily better, because subjects HAN et al.: SELECTION OF MUSCLE-ACTIVITY -BASED COST FUNCTION IN HIL OPTIMIZA TION 949 T ABLE III THE MUSCLE ACTIVITY WEIGHT COMBINA TION IN COST FUNCTION OBT AINED BY PSO were prone to fatigue, resulting in the changes in physical responses [9]. Therefore, we should choose the optimization time as short as possible. We tried to carry out CMAES optimization for 4 generations , which can achieve the desired effects. In each HIL optimization, we set the initial parame- ters which the subject felt comfortable with. We expected that the parameters were not far away from the optimum, so 4 generations of CMAES was su fﬁcient for the optimization of 2 parameters ( t p , τp ). The ﬁrst generation was used to sample and evaluate the space from initial guess. The second generation was used to sample and evaluate the expanded space in case the optimum was not within the initial space. The third generation is expected to sample around the optimum with fairly large variance. The fourth generation was used to ﬁne tune the estimation of the optimum [22]. An optimization experiment took 24 minutes, and more generations may cause muscle fatigue and affect the optim ization results. Finally, each HIL optimization was carried out for 4 generations and two different optimized torques: OT -MAWS and OT -SOL can be obtained by HIL optimization based on CF-MAWS and CF- SOL, respectively. In results validation, each subject experienced zero torque condition and two optimized assistive torques OT-MAWS and OT-SOL. To minimize the effects of adaptation and fatigue, the subject experienced the three assistance patterns again, but in the opposite order. All assistance patterns lasted for 2 minutes, and then the last 60 s of data were recorded. The validation experiment of each subject was completed within one day, during which the positions of EMG sensors were unchanged. We veriﬁed the effectiveness of our cost function by comparing the optimized CF value when the subject was provided with OT-MAWS and OT-SOL in results validation. III. R ESUL TS The results of optimized muscle activity weight combination are shown in T ABLE III. The mean weights of mGAS, lGAS, SOL and T A activity under all gait conditions are 0.153, 0.104, 0.953 and 0.145, respectively and the mean optimized objective J is − 9.363. The weight of SOL activity g3 reaches its upper bound 1 under most gait conditions, while mGAS, lGAS and TA activities have the lower weight. CF-MAWS (optimized cost function) and CF-SOL can be expressed as: CF − MA WS = 0.153 · mGAS + 0.104 · lGAS +0.953 · SOL + 0.145 · TA (5) CF − SOL = 0 · mGAS + 0 · lGAS + 1 · SOL + 0 · TA (6) where, mGAS , lGAS , SOL , TA are RMS of EMG signals of four muscles in a gait cycle and EMG signals need be normal- ized by the maximum under zero torque condition for a certain gait condition. Using CF-MAWS and CF-SOL as the HIL optimization objective, the obtained exoskeleton assistance patterns of four subjects were: Subject1 under Normal Walk- ing: OT -MAWS= [48.50%, 47.58 N·m], OT -SOL= [47.70%, 39.22 N ·m]; Subject2 under Slow Walking: OT -MAWS = [50.00%, 34.16 N ·m], OT -SOL = [50.37%, 32.39 N ·m]; Subject3 under Uphill Walking (12%): OT -MAWS= [47.59%, 45.85 N·m], OT -SOL= [47.56%, 40.50 N ·m]; Subject4 under Loaded Walking (5 kg): OT -MAWS = [50.27%, 33.89 N ·m], OT-SOL = [48.87%, 35.20 N · m] ( Fig. 5A ). Optimized CF values of four subjects when they were provided with assistive torque OT -MAWS were lower than those when they were provided with OT-SOL. SOL activity were the same. Com- pared to zero torque condition, optimized CF values under four gait conditions reduced by 31.6%, 33.2%, 26.2% and 10.71%, respectively ( Fig. 5B , 5C). From optimized CF value under different gait conditions (Fig. 6 ), we obtained that the later t p under slow walking or the earlier tp under fast walking will produce the better effect of exoskeleton assistance. We also found tp may be earlier with the increase of ground slopes and optimal assistance parameters were not sensitive to the change of load weights. For a certain gait, the drop amplitude of optimized CF value reached the maximum mostly wh en the subject was provided with the maximal τp (50 N·m) under three different tp. IV . D ISCUSSION Our ﬁrst goal was to provide a method of constructing the muscle-activity-based cost function for multi-gait HIL optimization. We used scanning experiments data of one subject to get muscle activity weight combinations under each gait condition, and then used the average result of all gait conditions as the cost function for multi-gait HIL optimization. The reason why one subject participated was that the main purpose of this study was to reduce the experimental scales as much as possible, since the scanning of multi- gait, multi-assistance human responses took too long time (in total over 300 minutes of walking assisted by exoskeleton) and was not suitable for most participants, especially for gait-impaired patients. Therefore, we ﬁrstly tried to construct a cost function on the basis of single subject’s data. Then we recruited other subjects and used our cost function to 950 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 29, 2021 Fig. 5. Results of HIL optimization and results validation experiments of four subjects. (A) The optimized exoskeleton assistive torques in HIL optimization. OT -MAWS and OT -SOL are the optimized torques obtained by HIL optimization based on CF-MAWS and CF-SOL, respectively . (B) Optimized CF value when subjects were provided with zero torque ( ZT), OT -MAWS and OT -SOL in results validation experiments. Bars and whiskers are means and standard deviations of optimized CF values in all steps. (C) Soleus activity when subjects were provided with zero torque, OT -MAWS and OT -SOL. Muscle activities are normalized by the maximum under zero torque condition under each gait condition. Bars and whiskers are means and standard deviations of muscle activities in all steps. ∗ represents statistically signiﬁcant di fferences between optimized CF value or Soleus activity under OT -MAWS and that under OT -SOL (t-test,α = 0.05). carry out HIL optimization under different gait conditions to verify its effectiveness. In Fig. 5 , optimized CF values of four subjects when they were provided with OT -MAWS were lower than those under OT -SOL, which showed that using our cost function produced assistance patterns that reduced more muscle activities and subjects felt more comfortable with. Meanwhile, it also added to the proof that our proposed cost function can be generalized to different subjects and gait conditions. From the PSO results in T ABLE III, we found that SOL activity weight reached its upper bound 1 under most gait conditions, which showed that the difference of its activity between different assistance patterns was the largest under these gait conditions. From the biomechanical point of view, SOL arises from the posterior surface of the tibia, ﬁbula and the deep calf muscles and its tendons join with gastrocnemius to plantarﬂex the ankle [20]. The slow twitch ﬁbers of SOL are more than fast twitch ﬁbers and SOL is resistant to fatigue so as to involve in less intense sports such as standing, walking and jogging [20], [23]. Therefore, when the plantarﬂexion assistive torque was provided f or ankle joint, it replaced the contraction of SOL, resulting in the reduction of muscle activities. This explanation also indicated that the exoskeleton assistance torque was consistent with the biomechanics of human walking. mGAS and lGAS activities had the lower weights. Presum- ably it was because fast twitch ﬁbers of GAS are more than those of SOL, and GAS are used for explosive activities with great strength, such as weight lifting, sprinting and jumping, but they seldom involves in walking. In particular, mGAS and lGAS activity showed the higher weights under FW ( g 1 = 0.752, g2 = 0.479), indicating that the contribution of GAS to human walking increased when fast walking, so the difference of their activities under different assistance patterns was more signiﬁcant, which was consistent with our analysis. The weight of T A activity g4 was positive or negative, which showed that the subject maybe adopt different walking strategies to adapt to the change of assistance patterns under different gait conditions. g4 did not reach the lower bound − 1 (the minimum was − 0.222), which indicated that the range of g4 was feasible. When g4 was negative, we found that the change trend of its activity under different assistance patterns was opposite to SOL activity. Therefore, T A can be regarded as a balance term in cost function. T A has antago- nistic effect on exoskeleton assistance, and the application of inappropriate slightly assistive torque may increase its activity. However, the results in Fig. 4 showed that its activity reduced signiﬁcantly compared to zero torque (P < 0.05) when the subject was provided with assistive torque with late t p under SW and all assistance patterns under LW20. Accordingly, g4 reached the maximum under the two gait conditions (SW: g4 = 0.841, LW20: g4 = 1). The possible reason was that when slow walking, the subject was more relaxed so that it was not necessary to quickly lift the foot to get a ground clearance, and the late tp was more suitable for SW . Under LW20, muscle fatigue slowed the footstep, which will weaken the antagonism of T A to assistive torques from the exoskeleton. Current HIL optimization protocols require around 2 minutes to estimate the metabolic cost for each control law [7], [9], [14], so it will take at least 48 minutes to complete CMAES optimization for 4 generation (6 control laws per generation), and it is only in the case of two-parameter optimization and single joint assistance. More parameters and numbers of joint assistance will led to longer periods for HAN et al.: SELECTION OF MUSCLE-ACTIVITY -BASED COST FUNCTION IN HIL OPTIMIZA TION 951 Fig. 6. Optimized cost function value over the whole stride under different exoskeleton assistance patterns for all gait conditions. (A) Level Walking EXP .(B) Uphill Walkling EXP . (C) Loaded Walking EXP . (D) Incline Walking EXP . Bars and whiskers are means and standard deviations of it in all steps. ∗ represents that it reduced signiﬁcantly compar ed to zero torque. Shadow represents that it is the lowest under this assistance pattern. The numbers above the bars represent the reduction percent age of optimized CF value compared to zero torque. HIL optimization, which is impractical for patients. EMG signals need less estimation time (about 40 s) than metabolic cost. We collected EMG signals for 60 s for each control law, so using our cost function can reduce the time needed by 50% compared to HIL optimization based on metabolic cost. Our second goal was to ﬁnd the appropriate initial assistance patterns in multi-gait HIL optimization, which will lead to less optimization generation of CMAES. We calculated optimized CF value with the mean weight combination [0.153, 0.104, 0.953, 0.145] to ﬁnd the appropriate initial values of t p and τp under different gait conditions ( Fig. 6 ). In Level Walking EXP , optimized CF value was the lowest in p9 (late tp ,h i g h τp ) under SW , and it reduced by 20.02% compared to zero torque (the same below). While under FW , it was the lowest at p3 (early tp ,h i g hτp), reducing by 28.71%. When walking at normal speed, it was the lowest in p9 too, reducing by 32.53%, but the difference between it in p9 and in p6 (middle tp ,h i g h τp ) was smaller, so the effect of assistance patterns with later tp under slow walking or earlier tp under fast walking will be better. In Uphill Walking EXP , with the increase of slope from 6% to 12%, optimized CF value changed from the lowest in p9 to in p3, reducing by 29.87% and 30.63%, respectively. Under UW6, there was little difference between the optimized CF value in p6 and that in p9 (p6: 0.1839 ± 0.0151; p9: 0.1738 ± 0.0123), so with the increase of ground slope, t p maybe earlier, but it depended on the subject’s walking strategy. When the strategy of increasing the stride frequency and decreasing the stride length was adopted to adapt to the uphill gait condition, it may be necessary to set tp earlier. On the contrary, tp should be later. In Loaded Walking EXP , the change of load weights did not change the distribution of optimized CF value under nine assistance patterns and it was all the lowest in p9, with the reduction of 42.01% (NW), 25.96% (LW10) and 38.19% (LW20), respectively. Therefore, assistive torque parameters were not sensitive to the change of load weights. In Incline Walking EXP , when the subject went up 12% slope at slow speed, normal speed and fast speed, the lowest optimized CF value occurred in p9, p6 and p3, reducing by 25.48%, 27.17%, and 29.24%, respectively. These results suggested that t p may be the determinant of the effect of exoskeleton assistance under multi-gait conditions. From HIL optimization results in Fig. 5 , tp of optimized assistive torque was earlier (about 47%) under UW12, while it was later (about 50%) under SW , which was consistent with above conclusions. Meanwhile, it did not need too high τp under SW . Under UW12 and LW5, the decrease of optimized CF value under OT -MAWS was smaller than that under NW . We did not choose high enough slopes and load weights, so optimized CF value may have a higher decrease under gait conditions with higher slopes and load weights. V. C ONCLUSION We presented a method to construct a muscle-activity- based cost function and used it to provide a reference for the initial parameter identiﬁcation of assistance patterns in HIL optimization of multi-gait ankle exoskeleton assistance. EMG signal over metabolic cost was selected to reﬂect the human performance to avoid long evaluation periods. We used statistical methods to identify the best weighted combination of lower leg muscle activities that differentiate different ankle exoskeleton assistance the most. It provided evidence and guidance to cost function selection in HIL optimization of ankle exoskeleton customizatio n under different gait condi- tions. The results are expected to help improving the efﬁciency of HIL optimization for lower-limb exoskeletons. For future works, we plan to establish a more accurate muscle-activity-based cost func tion by comparing the relation- ship between metabolic cost and lower leg muscle activities under multiple gait conditions, and we will recruit more 952 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL SYSTEMS AND REHABILIT A TION ENGINEERING, VOL. 29, 2021 subjects to carry out HIL optimization to build a multi-gait optimal assistance parameter model of ankle exoskeletons. REFERENCES [1] J. Ghan and H. Kazerooni, “System identiﬁcation for the Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2006, pp. 2477–2484. [2] G. Aguirre-Ollinger, J. E. Colgat e, M. A. Peshkin, and A. Goswami, “Active-impedance control of a lower-limb assistive exoskeleton,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robot. , Jun. 2007, pp. 188–195. [3] A. B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and A. Chu, “Biomechanical design of the berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX),” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 128–138, Apr. 2006. [4] K. Suzuki, G. Mito, H. Kawamoto, Y . Hasegawa, and Y . Sankai, “Intention-based walking support for paraplegia patients with robot suit HAL,” Adv. Robot., vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1441–1469, Jan. 2007. [5] W. Cloud, “Man ampliﬁers: M achines that let you carry a ton,” Popular Sci., vol. 187, no. 5, pp. 70–73, 1965. [6] S. Jezernik, G. Colombo, T. Keller, H. Frueh, and M. Morari, “Robotic orthosis lokomat: A rehabilitation and research tool,” Neuromodulation, Technol. Neural Interface , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 108–115, Apr. 2003. [7] K. A. Ingraham, D. P . Ferris, and C. D. Remy, “Evaluating physiological signal salience for estimating metabolic energy cost from wearable sensors,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 126, no. 3, pp. 717–729, Mar. 2019. [ 8 ] J .R .K o l l e ret al. , “‘Body-in-the-loop’ optimization of assistive robotic devices: A validation study,” in Proc. Robot., Sci. Syst. , 2016, pp. 1–10. [9] J. Zhang et al. , “Human-in-the-loop optimization of exoskeleton assis- tance,” Science, vol. 356, pp. 1280–1284, Jun. 2017. [10] M. Kim et al. , “Human-in-the-loop Bayesian optimization of wear- able device parameters,” PLoS ONE , vol. 12, no. 9, Sep. 2017, Art. no. e0184054. [11] Y . Ding, M. Kim, S. Kuindersma, a nd C. J. Walsh, “Human-in-the-loop optimization of hip assistance w ith a soft exosuit during walking,” Sci. Robot., vol. 3, no. 15, Feb. 2018, Art. no. eaar5438. [12] R. W. Jackson and S. H. Collins, “Heuristic-based ankle exoskeleton control for co-adaptive assistance of human locomotion,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. , vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 2059–2069, Oct. 2019. [13] K. A. Witte, P . Fiers, A. L. Sheets-Singer, and S. H. Collins, “Improving the energy economy of human runni ng with powered and unpowered ankle exoskeleton assistance,” Sci. Robot. , vol. 5, no. 40, Mar. 2020, Art. no. eaay9108. [14] J. C. Selinger and J. M. Donelan, “E stimating instantaneous energetic cost during non-steady-state gait,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 117, no. 11, pp. 1406–1415, Dec. 2014. [15] J. Zhang, C. C. Cheah, and S. H. Collins, “Experimental comparison of torque control methods on an ankle exoskeleton during human walking,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Automat. , May 2015, pp. 5584–5589. [16] J. Zhang, C. C. Cheah, and S. H. Collins, “Torque control in legged loco- motion,” in Bioinspired Legged Locomotion , 2017, ch. 5, pp. 375–428. [17] K. A. Witte, J. Zhang, R. W. Jackson, and S. H. Collins, “Design of two lightweight, high-bandwidth torque -controlled ankle exoskeletons,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA) , May 2015, pp. 1223–1228. [18] R. W. Jackson and S. H. Collins, “An experimental comparison of the relative beneﬁts of work and torque assistance in ankle exoskeletons,” J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 119, no. 5, pp. 541–557, Sep. 2015. [19] Y . Han and X. Wang, “The biomechanical study of lower limb during human walking,” Sci. China Technol. Sci. , vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 983–991, Apr. 2011. [20] M. W. Whittle, Ed., An Introduction to Gait Analysis , 4th ed. Oxford, U.K.: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2004. [21] W. Wang, J. Chen, Y . Ji, W. Jin, J. Liu, and J. Zhang, “Evaluation of lower leg muscle activities during human walking assisted by an ankle exoskeleton,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 7168–7176, Nov. 2020. [22] J. Zhang, Towards Systematic Controller Design in Rehabilitation Robots. Pittsburgh, PA, USA: Carnegie Mellon Univ., 2016. [23] F. C. Anderson and M. G. Pandy, “ Individual muscle contributions to support in normal walking,” Gait Posture, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 159–169, Apr. 2003. [24] S. H. Collins, M. B. Wiggin, and G. S. Sawicki, “Reducing the energy cost of human walking using an unpowered exoskeleton,” Nature, vol. 522, no. 7555, pp. 212–215, Jun. 2015. [25] G. Lee et al. , “Reducing the metabolic cost of running with a tethered soft exosuit,” Sci. Robot. , vol. 2, no. 6, May 2017, Art. no. eaan6708. [26] J. Kim et al., “Reducing the metabolic rate of walking and running with a versatile, portable exosuit,” Science, vol. 365, no. 6454, pp. 668–672, Aug. 2019. [27] C. Fleischer and G. Hommel, “A human-exoskeleton interface utilizing electromyography,” IEEE Trans. Robot. , vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 872–882, Aug. 2008. [28] Y . Zhuang, S. Y ao, C. Ma, and R. Song, “Admittance control based on EMG-driven musculoskeletal model improves the human–robot syn- chronization,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1211–1218, Feb. 2019. [29] J. C. Selinger, S. M. O’Connor, J. D. Wong, and J. M. Donelan, “Humans can continuously optimize energetic cost during walking,” Current Biol., vol. 25, no. 18, pp. 2452–2456, Sep. 2015. [30] E. M. McCain et al. , “Mechanics and energetics of post-stroke walking aided by a powered ankle exoskeleto n with speed-adaptive myoelectric control,” J. NeuroEng. Rehabil. , vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Dec. 2019. [31] P . Malcolm, W. Derave, S. Ga lle, and D. De Clercq, “A simple exoskeleton that assists plantarﬂe xion can reduce the metabolic cost of human walking,” PLoS ONE , vol. 8, no. 2, Feb. 2013, Art. no. e56137. [32] A. Christie, J. G. Inglis, G. Kamen , and D. A. Gabriel, “Relationships between surface EMG variables and motor unit ﬁring rates,” Eur . J. Appl. Physiol. , vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 177–185, Sep. 2009. [33] S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaffer, A. De Luca, and G. Hirzinger, “Collision detection and reaction: A contribution to safe physical human-robot interaction,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. , Sep. 2008, pp. 3356–3363.